Volume 1

Principles of Accounting,
Volume 1: Financial
Accounting

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
MITCHELL FRANKLIN, LE MOYNE COLLEGE (FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING)
PATTY GRAYBEAL, UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN-DEARBORN (MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING)
DIXON COOPER, OUACHITA BAPTIST UNIVERSITY

OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005
To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.
©2019 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution Non-Commercial ShareAlike 4.0 International License (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0). Under this license, any user
of this textbook or the textbook contents herein can share, remix, and build upon the content for
noncommercial purposes only. Any adaptations must be shared under the same type of license. In any case of
sharing the original or adapted material, whether in whole or in part, the user must provide proper attribution
as follows:
-

-

-

-

If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and
HTML), then you must retain on every page the following attribution:
“Download for free at https://openstax.org/details/books/principles-financial-accounting.”
If you noncommercially redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every
physical page the following attribution:
“Download for free at https://openstax.org/details/books/principles-financial-accounting.”
If you noncommercially redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format
page view (including but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following
attribution:
“Download for free at https://openstax.org/details/books/principles-financial-accounting.”
If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
https://openstax.org/details/books/principles-financial-accounting in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.
Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.
PRINT BOOK ISBN-10
PRINT BOOK ISBN-13
PDF VERSION ISBN-10
PDF VERSION ISBN-13
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

1-947172-68-9
978-1-947172-68-5
1-947172-67-0
978-1-947172-67-8

OPENSTAX
OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we’re committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY
OpenStax, OpenStax CNX, and OpenStax Tutor are initiatives of Rice University. As a leading research university
with a distinctive commitment to undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research,
unsurpassed teaching, and contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by
cultivating a diverse community of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human
endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT
OpenStax is grateful for our generous philanthropic partners, who support our vision to improve educational
opportunities for all learners.
Laura and John Arnold Foundation

The Maxfield Foundation

Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation

Burt and Deedee McMurtry

Ann and John Doerr

Michelson 20MM Foundation

Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation

National Science Foundation

Girard Foundation

The Open Society Foundations

Google Inc.

Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III

The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation

Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation

Rusty and John Jaggers

The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund

The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation

Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation

Charles Koch Foundation

The Stuart Family Foundation

Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.

Tammy and Guillermo Treviño

Study where you want, what
you want, when you want.
When you access College Success in our web view, you can use our new online
highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.
Our books are free and flexible, forever.
Get started at openstax.org/details/books/principles-financial-accounting

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
1

1

Role of Accounting in Society

11

1.1 Explain the Importance of Accounting and Distinguish between Financial and Managerial
Accounting 12
1.2 Identify Users of Accounting Information and How They Apply Information 14
1.3 Describe Typical Accounting Activities and the Role Accountants Play in Identifying,
Recording, and Reporting Financial Activities 18
1.4 Explain Why Accounting Is Important to Business Stakeholders 24
1.5 Describe the Varied Career Paths Open to Individuals with an Accounting Education 32

2

Introduction to Financial Statements

61

2.1 Describe the Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, Balance Sheet, and
Statement of Cash Flows, and How They Interrelate 62
2.2 Define, Explain, and Provide Examples of Current and Noncurrent Assets, Current and
Noncurrent Liabilities, Equity, Revenues, and Expenses 77
2.3 Prepare an Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, and Balance Sheet 81

3

Analyzing and Recording Transactions

115

3.1 Describe Principles, Assumptions, and Concepts of Accounting and Their Relationship to
Financial Statements 116
3.2 Define and Describe the Expanded Accounting Equation and Its Relationship to Analyzing
Transactions 124
3.3 Define and Describe the Initial Steps in the Accounting Cycle 130
3.4 Analyze Business Transactions Using the Accounting Equation and Show the Impact of
Business Transactions on Financial Statements 135
3.5 Use Journal Entries to Record Transactions and Post to T-Accounts 140
3.6 Prepare a Trial Balance 165

4

The Adjustment Process
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5

5

211

Explain the Concepts and Guidelines Affecting Adjusting Entries 212
Discuss the Adjustment Process and Illustrate Common Types of Adjusting Entries
Record and Post the Common Types of Adjusting Entries 227
Use the Ledger Balances to Prepare an Adjusted Trial Balance 236
Prepare Financial Statements Using the Adjusted Trial Balance 239

Completing the Accounting Cycle

285

5.1 Describe and Prepare Closing Entries for a Business
5.2 Prepare a Post-Closing Trial Balance 298

286

215

5.3 Apply the Results from the Adjusted Trial Balance to Compute Current Ratio and Working
Capital Balance, and Explain How These Measures Represent Liquidity 300
5.4 Appendix: Complete a Comprehensive Accounting Cycle for a Business 313

6

Merchandising Transactions

365

6.1 Compare and Contrast Merchandising versus Service Activities and Transactions 366
6.2 Compare and Contrast Perpetual versus Periodic Inventory Systems 378
6.3 Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise Purchases Using the Perpetual Inventory
System 386
6.4 Analyze and Record Transactions for the Sale of Merchandise Using the Perpetual Inventory
System 392
6.5 Discuss and Record Transactions Applying the Two Commonly Used Freight-In
Methods 400
6.6 Describe and Prepare Multi-Step and Simple Income Statements for Merchandising
Companies 404
6.7 Appendix: Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise Purchases and Sales Using the
Periodic Inventory System 408

7

Accounting Information Systems

451

7.1 Define and Describe the Components of an Accounting Information System 452
7.2 Describe and Explain the Purpose of Special Journals and Their Importance to
Stakeholders 466
7.3 Analyze and Journalize Transactions Using Special Journals 476
7.4 Prepare a Subsidiary Ledger 487
7.5 Describe Career Paths Open to Individuals with a Joint Education in Accounting and
Information Systems 494

8

Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

531

8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4

Analyze Fraud in the Accounting Workplace 532
Define and Explain Internal Controls and Their Purpose within an Organization 535
Describe Internal Controls within an Organization 542
Define the Purpose and Use of a Petty Cash Fund, and Prepare Petty Cash Journal
Entries 547
8.5 Discuss Management Responsibilities for Maintaining Internal Controls within an
Organization 551
8.6 Define the Purpose of a Bank Reconciliation, and Prepare a Bank Reconciliation and Its
Associated Journal Entries 552
8.7 Describe Fraud in Financial Statements and Sarbanes-Oxley Act Requirements 555

9

Accounting for Receivables

577

9.1 Explain the Revenue Recognition Principle and How It Relates to Current and Future Sales
and Purchase Transactions 578
9.2 Account for Uncollectible Accounts Using the Balance Sheet and Income Statement
Approaches 584

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
9.7

10

Determine the Efficiency of Receivables Management Using Financial Ratios 594
Discuss the Role of Accounting for Receivables in Earnings Management 599
Apply Revenue Recognition Principles to Long-Term Projects 603
Explain How Notes Receivable and Accounts Receivable Differ 606
Appendix: Comprehensive Example of Bad Debt Estimation 612

Inventory

647

10.1 Describe and Demonstrate the Basic Inventory Valuation Methods and Their Cost Flow
Assumptions 648
10.2 Calculate the Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Inventory Using the Periodic Method 657
10.3 Calculate the Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Inventory Using the Perpetual Method 663
10.4 Explain and Demonstrate the Impact of Inventory Valuation Errors on the Income
Statement and Balance Sheet 672
10.5 Examine the Efficiency of Inventory Management Using Financial Ratios 674

11

Long-Term Assets
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5

12

13

721

745

Identify and Describe Current Liabilities 746
Analyze, Journalize, and Report Current Liabilities 755
Define and Apply Accounting Treatment for Contingent Liabilities 764
Prepare Journal Entries to Record Short-Term Notes Payable 773
Record Transactions Incurred in Preparing Payroll 777

Long-Term Liabilities
13.1
13.2
13.3
13.4

14

Distinguish between Tangible and Intangible Assets 700
Analyze and Classify Capitalized Costs versus Expenses 704
Explain and Apply Depreciation Methods to Allocate Capitalized Costs 709
Describe Accounting for Intangible Assets and Record Related Transactions
Describe Some Special Issues in Accounting for Long-Term Assets 723

Current Liabilities
12.1
12.2
12.3
12.4
12.5

699

809

Explain the Pricing of Long-Term Liabilities 810
Compute Amortization of Long-Term Liabilities Using the Effective-Interest Method
Prepare Journal Entries to Reflect the Life Cycle of Bonds 830
Appendix: Special Topics Related to Long-Term Liabilities 842

Corporation Accounting

822

859

14.1 Explain the Process of Securing Equity Financing through the Issuance of Stock 860
14.2 Analyze and Record Transactions for the Issuance and Repurchase of Stock 871
14.3 Record Transactions and the Effects on Financial Statements for Cash Dividends, Property
Dividends, Stock Dividends, and Stock Splits 879

14.4 Compare and Contrast Owners’ Equity versus Retained Earnings 890
14.5 Discuss the Applicability of Earnings per Share as a Method to Measure
Performance 897

15

Partnership Accounting
15.1
15.2
15.3
15.4
15.5

16

925

Describe the Advantages and Disadvantages of Organizing as a Partnership 926
Describe How a Partnership Is Created, Including the Associated Journal Entries 932
Compute and Allocate Partners’ Share of Income and Loss 935
Prepare Journal Entries to Record the Admission and Withdrawal of a Partner 938
Discuss and Record Entries for the Dissolution of a Partnership 943

Statement of Cash Flows

955

16.1
16.2
16.3
16.4
16.5

Explain the Purpose of the Statement of Cash Flows 956
Differentiate between Operating, Investing, and Financing Activities 957
Prepare the Statement of Cash Flows Using the Indirect Method 959
Prepare the Completed Statement of Cash Flows Using the Indirect Method 971
Use Information from the Statement of Cash Flows to Prepare Ratios to Assess Liquidity
and Solvency 974
16.6 Appendix: Prepare a Completed Statement of Cash Flows Using the Direct Method 979

A

Financial Statement Analysis

B

Time Value of Money

1021

C

Suggested Resources

1025

Index

1009

1041

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Preface

1

Preface
Welcome to Principles of Accounting, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to increase student
access to high-quality learning materials, maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to no cost.

About OpenStax
OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it’s our mission to improve student access to education.
Our first openly licensed college textbook was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled to over 30
books for college and AP® courses used by hundreds of thousands of students. OpenStax Tutor, our low-cost
personalized learning tool, is being used in college courses throughout the country. Through our partnerships
with philanthropic foundations and our alliance with other educational resource organizations, OpenStax is
breaking down the most common barriers to learning and empowering students and instructors to succeed.

About OpenStax resources
Customization
Principles of Accounting is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International (CC BY-NC-SA) license, which means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content,
as long as you provide attribution to OpenStax and its content contributors, do not use the content for
commercial purposes, and distribute the content under the same CC BY-NC-SA license.
Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections
that are most relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students
certain chapters and sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link
in your syllabus to the sections in the web view of your book.
Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version
can be made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit the
Instructor Resources section of your book page on openstax.org for more information.

Art attribution in Principles of Accounting
In Principles of Accounting, most art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and
license within the caption. Because the art is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide
the same attribution to its original source.
To maximize readability and content flow, some art does not include attribution in the text. If you reuse art
from this text that does not have attribution provided, use the following attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license.

Errata
All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook,
errors sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed
pedagogically necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on
openstax.org. Subject matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining
transparent about all updates, so you will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on
openstax.org.

2

Preface

Format
You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through openstax.org, and for a low cost in print.

About Principles of Accounting
Principles of Accounting is designed to meet the scope and sequence requirements of a two-semester
accounting course that covers the fundamentals of financial and managerial accounting. This book is
specifically designed to appeal to both accounting and non-accounting majors, exposing students to the core
concepts of accounting in familiar ways to build a strong foundation that can be applied across business fields.
Each chapter opens with a relatable real-life scenario for today’s college student. Thoughtfully designed
examples are presented throughout each chapter, allowing students to build on emerging accounting
knowledge. Concepts are further reinforced through applicable connections to more detailed business
processes. Students are immersed in the “why” as well as the “how” aspects of accounting in order to
reinforce concepts and promote comprehension over rote memorization.

Coverage and scope
Our Principles of Accounting textbook adheres to the scope and sequence requirements of accounting courses
nationwide. We have endeavored to make the core concepts and practical applications of accounting
engaging, relevant, and accessible to students.
Principles of Accounting, Volume 1: Financial Accounting
Chapter 1: The Role of Accounting in Society
Chapter 2: Introduction to Financial Statements
Chapter 3: Analyzing and Recording Transactions
Chapter 4: The Adjustment Process
Chapter 5: Completing the Accounting Cycle
Chapter 6: Merchandising Transactions
Chapter 7: Accounting Information Systems
Chapter 8: Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash
Chapter 9: Accounting for Receivables
Chapter 10: Inventory
Chapter 11: Long-Term Assets
Chapter 12: Current Liabilities
Chapter 13: Long-Term Liabilities
Chapter 14: Corporation Accounting
Chapter 15: Partnership Accounting
Chapter 16: Statement of Cash Flows
Principles of Accounting, Volume 2: Managerial Accounting
Chapter 1: Accounting as a Tool for Managers
Chapter 2: Building Blocks of Managerial Accounting

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Preface

3

Chapter 3: Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis
Chapter 4: Job Order Costing
Chapter 5: Process Costing
Chapter 6: Activity-Based, Variable, and Absorption Costing
Chapter 7: Budgeting
Chapter 8: Standard Costs and Variances
Chapter 9: Responsibility Accounting and Decentralization
Chapter 10: Short-Term Decision-Making
Chapter 11: Capital Budgeting Decisions
Chapter 12: Balanced Scorecard and Other Performance Measures
Chapter 13: Sustainability Reporting

Engaging feature boxes
Throughout Principles of Accounting, you will find features that engage students by taking selected topics a step
further.
• Your Turn. This feature provides students an opportunity to apply covered concepts.
• Concepts in Practice. This feature takes students beyond mechanics and illustrates the utility of a given
concept for accountants and non-accountants. We encourage instructors to reference these as part of
their in-class lectures and assessments to provide easily relatable applications.
• Think It Through. This scenario-based feature puts students in the role of decision-maker. With topics
ranging from ethical dilemmas to conflicting analytical results, the purpose of this feature is to teach
students that in the real world not every question has just one answer.
• Continuing Application at Work. This feature follows an individual company or segment of an industry
and examines how businesspeople conduct the decision-making process in different situations. It allows
students to see how concepts build on each other.
• Ethical Considerations. This feature illustrates the ethical implication of decisions, how accounting
concepts are applied to real-life examples, and how financial and managerial decisions can impact many
stakeholders.
• IFRS Connection. This feature presents the differences and similarities between U.S. GAAP and IFRS,
helping students understand how accounting concepts and rules between countries may vary and thus
affect financial reporting and decision-making.
• Link to Learning. This feature provides a very brief introduction to online resources and videos that are
pertinent to students’ exploration of the topic at hand.

Pedagogical features that reinforce key concepts
• Learning Objectives. Each chapter is organized into sections based on clear and comprehensive learning
objectives that help guide students on what they can expect to learn. After completing the modules and
assessments, students should be able to demonstrate mastery of the learning objectives.
• Summaries. Designed to support both students and instructors, section summaries distill the information
in each module down to key, concise points.
• Key Terms. Key terms are bolded the first time that they are used and are followed by a definition in
context. Definitions of key terms are also listed in the glossary, which appears at the end of the chapter.

4

Preface

Assessments to test comprehension and practice skills
An assortment of assessment types are provided in this text to allow for practice and self-assessment
throughout the course of study.
• Multiple Choice. are basic review questions that test comprehension.
• Questions include brief, open-response questions to test comprehension.
• Exercises (Sets A and B) are application Application questions that require a combination of quantitative
and analytical skills.
• Problems (Sets A and B) are advanced Advanced activities that allow students to demonstrate learning
and application of multiple learning objectives and skills concurrently in one set of facts. Problems are
designed to assess higher levels of Bloom’s taxonomy.
• Thought Provokers are open-ended questions, often with more than one acceptable response, designed
to stretch students intellectually.

Effective art program
Our art program is designed to enhance students’ understanding of concepts through clear and effective
presentations of financial materials and diagrams.

Figure 1

Journal Entry.

Figure 2

Work in Process Inventory T-Account.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Preface

5

Figure 3

Income Statement.

Figure 4

Organizational Chart.

6

Preface

Figure 5

Cash Interest Payment.

Figure 6

General Ledger.

Additional resources
Student and instructor resources
We’ve compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides, an
instructor solution guide, and companion presentation slides. Instructor resources require a verified instructor
account, which you can apply for when you log in or create your account on openstax.org. Instructor and
student resources are typically available within a few months after the book’s initial publication. Take
advantage of these resources to supplement your OpenStax book.

Community Hubs
OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
Community Hubs on OER Commons—a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that
support OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own
materials or download resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching
material, multimedia, and relevant course content. We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Preface

7

most relevant to your teaching and research as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with
other faculty.
To reach the Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/OpenStax.

Technology partners
As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost
tools that are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book
page on openstax.org.

About the authors
Senior contributing authors
Mitchell Franklin, Le Moyne College (Financial Accounting)
Mitchell Franklin (PhD, CPA) is an Associate Professor and Director of Undergraduate and Graduate
Accounting Programs at Le Moyne College’s Madden School of Business. His research interests include the
impact of tax law on policy, and innovative education in both financial accounting and taxation, with articles
published in journals including Issues in Accounting Education, Advances in Accounting Education, Tax Notes,
Journal of Taxation, and The CPA Journal and Tax Adviser. He teaches introductory and advanced courses in
individual and corporate taxation as well as financial accounting. Prior to joining Le Moyne College, he served
on the faculty at Syracuse University.
Patty Graybeal, University of Michigan-Dearborn (Managerial Accounting)
Patty Graybeal received her BBA from Radford University and her MACCT and PhD from Virginia Tech. She
teaches undergraduate and graduate courses in financial, managerial, governmental, and international
accounting. She has published scholarly articles on performance plans and compensation structures, as well
as bankruptcy prediction, and she currently focuses on pedagogical issues related to instructional methods
and resources that enhance student academic success. Prior to UM-Dearborn, she was on the faculty at Wake
Forest University, George Mason University, and Virginia Tech. She brings significant real-world experience to
the classroom from her prior work in healthcare administration and her current work with the auto industry.
Dixon Cooper, Ouachita Baptist University
Dixon Cooper received his BBA in Accounting and MS in Taxation from the University of North Texas. He has
taught undergraduate and graduate courses in accounting, finance, and economics. In addition to his
academic activities, he served for approximately fifteen years as an author/editor for the AICPA’s continuing
education program and maintained a tax compliance and financial services practice. He also has several years
of experience in public accounting and consulting. Prior to teaching at Ouachita Baptist University, he was a
faculty member at the University of North Texas, Texas Christian University Austin College, and the University
of Arkansas.
Contributing authors
LuAnn Bean, Florida Institute of Technology
Ian Burt, Niagara University
Shana Carr, San Diego City College
David T. Collins, Bellarmine University
Shawna Coram, Florida State College at Jacksonville

8

Kenneth Creech, Briar Cliff University
Alan Czyzewski, Indiana State University
Michael Gauci, Florida Atlantic University
Cindy Greenman, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
Michael Haselkorn, Bentley University
Christine Irujo, Westfield State University
Cynthia Johnson, University of Arkansas at Little Rock
Cynthia Khanlarian, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University
Terri Lukshaitis, Ferris State University
Debra Luna, Southwest University
Bill Nantz, Houston Community College
Tatyana Pashnyak, Bainbridge State College
Brian Pusateri, University of Scranton
Ellen Rackas, Muhlenberg College
Marianne Rexer, Wilkes University
Roslyn Roberts, California State University, Sacramento
Rebecca Rosner, Long Island University
Jeffrey J. Sabolish, University of Michigan-Flint
Jason E. Swartzlander, Bluffton University
Diane Tanner, University of North Florida
Mark M. Ulrich, Queensborough Community College
Janis Weber, University of Louisiana Monroe
Linda Williams, Tidewater Community College
Darryl Woolley, University of Idaho
Reviewers
Janice Akao, Butler Community College
Chandra D. Arthur, Cuyahoga Community College
Kwadwo Asare, Bryant University
Dereck Barr-Pulliam, University of Wisconsin–Madison
John Bedient, Albion College
Debra Benson, Kennesaw State University
Amy Bourne, Oregon State University
Stacy Boyer-Davis, Northern Michigan University
Dena Breece, Methodist University
Lawrence Chui, University of St. Thomas, Minnesota
Sandra Cohen, Columbia College Chicago

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Preface

Preface

Bryan Coleman, Assumption College
Sue Cooper, Salisbury University
Constance Crawford, Ramapo College of New Jersey
Cori O. Crews, Valdosta State University
Annette Davis, Glendale Community College
Ronald de Ramon, Rockland Community College
Julie Dilling, Moraine Park Technical College
Terry Elliott, Morehead State University
Jim Emig, Villanova University
Darius Fatemi, Northern Kentucky University
Rhonda Gilreath, Tiffin University
Alan Glazer, Franklin & Marshall College
Marina Grau, Houston Community College
Amber Gray, Adrian College
Jeffry Haber, Iona College
Michelle Hagadorn, Roanoke College
Regina Ivory Butts, Fort Valley State University
Simone Keize, Broward College
Christine Kloezeman, California State University, Los Angeles
Lauri L. Kremer, Lycoming College
W. Eric Lee, University of Northern Iowa
Julie G. Lindsey, University of Phoenix
Jennifer Mack, Lindenwood University
Suneel Maheshwari, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
Richard Mandau, Piedmont Technical College
Josephine Mathias, Mercer County Community College
Ermira Mazziotta, Muhlenberg College
Karen B. McCarron, Georgia Gwinnett College
Michelle A. McFeaters, Grove City College
Britton McKay, Georgia Southern University
Christopher McNamara, Finger Lakes Community College
Glenn McQueary, Houston Community College
Tammy Metzke, Milwaukee Area Technical College
Stacey Mirinaviciene, Keuka College
Eleonor Moore, Kirtland Community College
Hassan Niazi, Northern State University

9

10

Felicia Olagbemi, Colorado State University-Global Campus
Suzanne Owens, Colorado Mesa University
Jenice Prather-Kinsey, University of Alabama at Birmingham
Tom Prieto, College of the Canyons
Atul Rai, Wichita State University
Kevin Raiford, College of Southern Nevada
Dave Repp, Strayer University
Patrick Rogan, Cosumnes River College
John Rossi, Moravian College
Angela Seidel, Saint Francis University
Margaret Shackell, Cornell University
Debra Sinclair, University of South Florida St. Petersburg
Mohsen Souissi, Fayetteville State University
Zivia Sweeney, University of Southern California
Tim Swenson, Sullivan University
Hai Ta, Niagara University
Andress Walker, Ventura County Community College District
Teresa Walker, Greensboro College
Roland Warfield, Seton Hill University
Michael Wiggins, Georgia Southern University
Joseph Winter, Niagara University
David Ziebart, University of Kentucky

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Preface

1

Role of Accounting in Society
Figure 1.1 Careers and Accounting. Promotional opportunities throughout a person’s career may involve
managerial responsibilities and often include responsibility for a portion of the organization’s financial
performance. Having an understanding of how accounting affects businesses can help the individual to be
successful in meeting the organization’s strategic and financial goals. (credit: modification of “Achievement”
by unknown/Pixabay, CC0)

Chapter Outline
1.1 Explain the Importance of Accounting and Distinguish between Financial and Managerial Accounting
1.2 Identify Users of Accounting Information and How They Apply Information
1.3 Describe Typical Accounting Activities and the Role Accountants Play in Identifying, Recording, and
Reporting Financial Activities
1.4 Explain Why Accounting Is Important to Business Stakeholders
1.5 Describe the Varied Career Paths Open to Individuals with an Accounting Education

Why It Matters
Jennifer has been in the social work profession for over 25 years. After graduating college, she started working
at an agency that provided services to homeless women and children. Part of her role was to work directly with
the homeless women and children to help them acquire adequate shelter and other necessities. Jennifer
currently serves as the director of an organization that provides mentoring services to local youth.
Looking back on her career in the social work field, Jennifer indicates that there are two things that surprised
her. The first thing that surprised her was that as a trained social worker she would ultimately become a
director of a social work agency and would be required to make financial decisions about programs and how
the money is spent. As a college student, she thought social workers would spend their entire careers
providing direct support to their clients. The second thing that surprised her was how valuable it is for

12

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

directors to have an understanding of accounting. She notes, “The best advice I received in college was when
my advisor suggested I take an accounting course. As a social work student, I was reluctant to do so because I
did not see the relevance. I didn’t realize so much of an administrator’s role involves dealing with financial
issues. I’m thankful that I took the advice and studied accounting. For example, I was surprised that I would be
expected to routinely present to the board our agency’s financial performance. The board includes several
business professionals and leaders from other agencies. Knowing the accounting terms and having a good
understanding of the information contained in the financial reports gives me a lot of confidence when
answering their questions. In addition, understanding what influences the financial performance of our
agency better prepares me to plan for the future.”
1.1

Explain the Importance of Accounting and Distinguish between Financial

and Managerial Accounting
Accounting is the process of organizing, analyzing, and communicating financial information that is used for
decision-making. Financial information is typically prepared by accountants—those trained in the specific
techniques and practices of the profession. This course explores many of the topics and techniques related to
the accounting profession. While many students will directly apply the knowledge gained in this course to
continue their education and become accountants and business professionals, others might pursue different
career paths. However, a solid understanding of accounting can for many still serve as a useful resource. In
fact, it is hard to think of a profession where a foundation in the principles of accounting would not be
beneficial. Therefore, one of the goals of this course is to provide a solid understanding of how financial
information is prepared and used in the workplace, regardless of your particular career path.

THINK IT THROUGH
Expertise
Every job or career requires a certain level of technical expertise and an understanding of the key aspects
necessary to be successful. The time required to develop the expertise for a particular job or career
varies from several months to much longer. For instance, doctors, in addition to the many years invested
in the classroom, invest a significant amount of time providing care to patients under the supervision of
more experienced doctors. This helps medical professionals develop the necessary skills to quickly and
effectively diagnose and treat the various medical conditions they spent so many years learning about.

Figure 1.2

College Graduation. (credit: modification of “140501-A-XA877-046” by Fort Wainwright

Public Affairs Office/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

13

Accounting also typically takes specialized training. Top accounting managers often invest many years
and have a significant amount of experience mastering complex financial transactions. Also, in addition
to attending college, earning professional certifications and investing in continuing education are
necessary to develop a skill set sufficient to becoming experts in an accounting professional field.
The level and type of training in accounting are often dependent on which of the myriad options of
accounting fields the potential accountant chooses to enter. To familiarize you with some potential
opportunities, Describe the Varied Career Paths Open to Individuals with an Accounting Education
examines many of these career options. In addition to covering an assortment of possible career
opportunities, we address some of the educational and experiential certifications that are available. Why
do you think accountants (and doctors) need to be certified and secure continuing education? In your
response, defend your position with examples.
In addition to doctors and accountants, what other professions can you think of that might require a
significant investment of time and effort in order to develop an expertise?

A traditional adage states that “accounting is the language of business.” While that is true, you can also say
that “accounting is the language of life.” At some point, most people will make a decision that relies on
accounting information. For example, you may have to decide whether it is better to lease or buy a vehicle.
Likewise, a college graduate may have to decide whether it is better to take a higher-paying job in a bigger city
(where the cost of living is also higher) or a job in a smaller community where both the pay and cost of living
may be lower.
In a professional setting, a theater manager may want to know if the most recent play was profitable. Similarly,
the owner of the local plumbing business may want to know whether it is worthwhile to pay an employee to be
“on call” for emergencies during off-hours and weekends. Whether personal or professional, accounting
information plays a vital role in all of these decisions.
You may have noticed that the decisions in these scenarios would be based on factors that include both
financial and nonfinancial information. For instance, when deciding whether to lease or buy a vehicle, you
would consider not only the monthly payments but also such factors as vehicle maintenance and reliability.
The college graduate considering two job offers might weigh factors such as working hours, ease of
commuting, and options for shopping and entertainment. The theater manager would analyze the proceeds
from ticket sales and sponsorships as well as the expenses for production of the play and operating the
concessions. In addition, the theater manager should consider how the financial performance of the play
might have been influenced by the marketing of the play, the weather during the performances, and other
factors such as competing events during the time of the play. All of these factors, both financial and
nonfinancial, are relevant to the financial performance of the play. In addition to the additional cost of having
an employee “on call” during evenings and weekends, the owner of the local plumbing business would
consider nonfinancial factors in the decision. For instance, if there are no other plumbing businesses that offer
services during evenings and weekends, offering emergency service might give the business a strategic
advantage that could increase overall sales by attracting new customers.
This course explores the role that accounting plays in society. You will learn about financial accounting, which
measures the financial performance of an organization using standard conventions to prepare and distribute
financial reports. Financial accounting is used to generate information for stakeholders outside of an
organization, such as owners, stockholders, lenders, and governmental entities such as the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).

14

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Financial accounting is also a foundation for understanding managerial accounting, which uses both
financial and nonfinancial information as a basis for making decisions within an organization with the purpose
of equipping decision makers to set and evaluate business goals by determining what information they need
to make a particular decision and how to analyze and communicate this information. Managerial accounting
information tends to be used internally, for such purposes as budgeting, pricing, and determining production
costs. Since the information is generally used internally, you do not see the same need for financial oversight
in an organization’s managerial data.
You will also note in your financial accounting studies that there are governmental and organizational entities
that oversee the accounting processes and systems that are used in financial accounting. These entities
include organizations such as the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the Financial Accounting
Standards Board (FASB), the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), and the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). The PCAOB was created after several major cases of corporate
fraud, leading to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, known as SOX. If you choose to pursue more advanced
accounting courses, especially auditing courses, you will address the SOX in much greater detail.
For now, it is not necessary to go into greater detail about the mechanics of these organizations or other
accounting and financial legislation. You just need to have a basic understanding that they function to provide
a degree of protection for those outside of the organization who rely on the financial information.
Whether or not you aspire to become an accountant, understanding financial and managerial accounting is
valuable and necessary for practically any career you will pursue. Management of a car manufacturer, for
example, would use both financial and managerial accounting information to help improve the business.
Financial accounting information is valuable as it measures whether or not the company was financially
successful. Knowing this provides management with an opportunity to repeat activities that have proven
effective and to make adjustments in areas in which the company has underperformed. Managerial
accounting information is likewise valuable. Managers of the car manufacturer may want to know, for
example, how much scrap is generated from a particular area in the manufacturing process. While identifying
and improving the manufacturing process (i.e., reducing scrap) helps the company financially, it may also help
other areas of the production process that are indirectly related, such as poor quality and shipping delays.
1.2

Identify Users of Accounting Information and How They Apply

Information
The ultimate goal of accounting is to provide information that is useful for decision-making. Users of
accounting information are generally divided into two categories: internal and external. Internal users are
those within an organization who use financial information to make day-to-day decisions. Internal users
include managers and other employees who use financial information to confirm past results and help make
adjustments for future activities.
External users are those outside of the organization who use the financial information to make decisions or to
evaluate an entity’s performance. For example, investors, financial analysts, loan officers, governmental
auditors, such as IRS agents, and an assortment of other stakeholders are classified as external users, while
still having an interest in an organization’s financial information. (Stakeholders are addressed in greater detail
in Explain Why Accounting Is Important to Business Stakeholders.)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

15

Characteristics, Users, and Sources of Financial Accounting Information
Organizations measure financial performance in monetary terms. In the United States, the dollar is used as
the standard measurement basis. Measuring financial performance in monetary terms allows managers to
compare the organization’s performance to previous periods, to expectations, and to other organizations or
industry standards.
Financial accounting is one of the broad categories in the study of accounting. While some industries and
types of organizations have variations in how the financial information is prepared and communicated,
accountants generally use the same methodologies—called accounting standards—to prepare the financial
information. You learn in Introduction to Financial Statements that financial information is primarily
communicated through financial statements, which include the Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s
Equity, Balance Sheet, and Statement of Cash Flows and Disclosures. These financial statements ensure the
information is consistent from period to period and generally comparable between organizations. The
conventions also ensure that the information provided is both reliable and relevant to the user.
Virtually every activity and event that occurs in a business has an associated cost or value and is known as a
transaction. Part of an accountant’s responsibility is to quantify these activities and events. In this course you
will learn about the many types of transactions that occur within a business. You will also examine the effects
of these transactions, including their impact on the financial position of the entity.
Accountants often use computerized accounting systems to record and summarize the financial reports, which
offer many benefits. The primary benefit of a computerized accounting system is the efficiency by which
transactions can be recorded and summarized, and financial reports prepared. In addition, computerized
accounting systems store data, which allows organizations to easily extract historical financial information.
Common computerized accounting systems include QuickBooks, which is designed for small organizations,
and SAP, which is designed for large and/or multinational organizations. QuickBooks is popular with smaller,
less complex entities. It is less expensive than more sophisticated software packages, such as Oracle or SAP,
and the QuickBooks skills that accountants developed at previous employers tend to be applicable to the
needs of new employers, which can reduce both training time and costs spent on acclimating new employees
to an employer’s software system. Also, being familiar with a common software package such as QuickBooks
helps provide employment mobility when workers wish to reenter the job market.
While QuickBooks has many advantages, once a company’s operations reach a certain level of complexity, it
will need a basic software package or platform, such as Oracle or SAP, which is then customized to meet the
unique informational needs of the entity.
Financial accounting information is mostly historical in nature, although companies and other entities also
incorporate estimates into their accounting processes. For example, you will learn how to use estimates to
determine bad debt expenses or depreciation expenses for assets that will be used over a multiyear lifetime.
That is, accountants prepare financial reports that summarize what has already occurred in an organization.
This information provides what is called feedback value. The benefit of reporting what has already occurred is
the reliability of the information. Accountants can, with a fair amount of confidence, accurately report the
financial performance of the organization related to past activities. The feedback value offered by the
accounting information is particularly useful to internal users. That is, reviewing how the organization
performed in the past can help managers and other employees make better decisions about and adjustments
to future activities.
Financial information has limitations, however, as a predictive tool. Business involves a large amount of

16

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

uncertainty, and accountants cannot predict how the organization will perform in the future. However, by
observing historical financial information, users of the information can detect patterns or trends that may be
useful for estimating the company’s future financial performance. Collecting and analyzing a series of
historical financial data is useful to both internal and external users. For example, internal users can use
financial information as a predictive tool to assess whether the long-term financial performance of the
organization aligns with its long-term strategic goals.
External users also use the historical pattern of an organization’s financial performance as a predictive tool.
For example, when deciding whether to loan money to an organization, a bank may require a certain number
of years of financial statements and other financial information from the organization. The bank will assess the
historical performance in order to make an informed decision about the organization’s ability to repay the
loan and interest (the cost of borrowing money). Similarly, a potential investor may look at a business’s past
financial performance in order to assess whether or not to invest money in the company. In this scenario, the
investor wants to know if the organization will provide a sufficient and consistent return on the investment. In
these scenarios, the financial information provides value to the process of allocating scarce resources (money).
If potential lenders and investors determine the organization is a worthwhile investment, money will be
provided, and, if all goes well, those funds will be used by the organization to generate additional value at a
rate greater than the alternate uses of the money.

Characteristics, Users, and Sources of Managerial Accounting Information
As you’ve learned, managerial accounting information is different from financial accounting information in
several respects. Accountants use formal accounting standards in financial accounting. These accounting
standards are referred to as generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and are the common set of
rules, standards, and procedures that publicly traded companies must follow when composing their financial
statements. The previously mentioned Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), an independent,
nonprofit organization that sets financial accounting and reporting standards for both public and private
sector businesses in the United States, uses the GAAP guidelines as its foundation for its system of accepted
accounting methods and practices, reports, and other documents.
Since most managerial accounting activities are conducted for internal uses and applications, managerial
accounting is not prepared using a comprehensive, prescribed set of conventions similar to those required by
financial accounting. This is because managerial accountants provide managerial accounting information that
is intended to serve the needs of internal, rather than external, users. In fact, managerial accounting
information is rarely shared with those outside of the organization. Since the information often includes
strategic or competitive decisions, managerial accounting information is often closely protected. The business
environment is constantly changing, and managers and decision makers within organizations need a variety of
information in order to view or assess issues from multiple perspectives.
Accountants must be adaptable and flexible in their ability to generate the necessary information
management decision-making. For example, information derived from a computerized accounting system is
often the starting point for obtaining managerial accounting information. But accountants must also be able
to extract information from other sources (internal and external) and analyze the data using mathematical,
formula-driven software (such as Microsoft Excel).
Management accounting information as a term encompasses many activities within an organization.
Preparing a budget, for example, allows an organization to estimate the financial performance for the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

17

upcoming year or years and plan for adjustments to scale operations according to the projections.
Accountants often lead the budgeting process by gathering information from internal (estimates from the
sales and engineering departments, for example) and external (trade groups and economic forecasts, for
example) sources. These data are then compiled and presented to decision makers within the organization.
Examples of other decisions that require management accounting information include whether an
organization should repair or replace equipment, make products internally or purchase the items from outside
vendors, and hire additional workers or use automation.
As you have learned, management accounting information uses both financial and nonfinancial information.
This is important because there are situations in which a purely financial analysis might lead to one decision,
while considering nonfinancial information might lead to a different decision. For example, suppose a financial
analysis indicates that a particular product is unprofitable and should no longer be offered by a company. If
the company fails to consider that customers also purchase a complementary good (you might recall that term
from your study of economics), the company may be making the wrong decision. For example, assume that
you have a company that produces and sells both computer printers and the replacement ink cartridges. If the
company decided to eliminate the printers, then it would also lose the cartridge sales. In the past, in some
cases, the elimination of one component, such as printers, led to customers switching to a different producer
for its computers and other peripheral hardware. In the end, an organization needs to consider both the
financial and nonfinancial aspects of a decision, and sometimes the effects are not intuitively obvious at the
time of the decision. Figure 1.3 offers an overview of some of the differences between financial and
managerial accounting.

18

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Figure 1.3

Comparing Reports between Financial and Managerial Accounting. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

1.3

Describe Typical Accounting Activities and the Role Accountants Play in

Identifying, Recording, and Reporting Financial Activities
We can classify organizations into three categories: for profit, governmental, and not for profit. These
organizations are similar in several aspects. For example, each of these organizations has inflows and outflows
of cash and other resources, such as equipment, furniture, and land, that must be managed. In addition, all of
these organizations are formed for a specific purpose or mission and want to use the available resources in an
efficient manner—the organizations strive to be good stewards, with the underlying premise of being
profitable. Finally, each of the organizations makes a unique and valuable contribution to society. Given the
similarities, it is clear that all of these organizations have a need for accounting information and for
accountants to provide that information.
There are also several differences. The main difference that distinguishes these organizations is the primary
purpose or mission of the organization, discussed in the following sections.

For-Profit Businesses
As the name implies, the primary purpose or mission of a for-profit business is to earn a profit by selling

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

19

goods and services. There are many reasons why a for-profit business seeks to earn a profit. The profits
generated by these organizations might be used to create value for employees in the form of pay raises for
existing employees as well as hiring additional workers. In addition, profits can be reinvested in the business
to create value in the form of research and development, equipment upgrades, facilities expansions, and many
other activities that make the business more competitive. Many companies also engage in charitable activities,
such as donating money, donating products, or allowing employees to volunteer in the communities. Finally,
profits can also be shared with employees in the form of either bonuses or commissions as well as with
owners of the business as a reward for the owners’ investment in the business. These issues, along with
others, and the associated accounting conventions will be explored throughout this course.
In for-profit businesses, accounting information is used to measure the financial performance of the
organization and to help ensure that resources are being used efficiently. Efficiently using existing resources
allows the businesses to improve quality of the products and services offered, remain competitive in the
marketplace, expand when appropriate, and ensure longevity of the business.
For-profit businesses can be further categorized by the types of products or services the business provides.
Let’s examine three types of for-profit businesses: manufacturing, retail (or merchandising), and service.

Manufacturing Businesses
A manufacturing business is a for-profit business that is designed to make a specific product or products.
Manufacturers specialize in procuring components in the most basic form (often called direct or raw materials)
and transforming the components into a finished product that is often drastically different from the original
components.
As you think about the products you use every day, you are probably already familiar with products made by
manufacturing firms. Examples of products made by manufacturing firms include automobiles, clothes, cell
phones, computers, and many other products that are used every day by millions of consumers.
In Job Order Costing (http://cnx.org/content/m68122/latest/) , you will examine the process of job costing,
learning how manufacturing firms transform basic components into finished, sellable products and the
techniques accountants use to record the costs associated with these activities.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Manufacturing
Think about the items you have used today. Make a list of the products that were created by
manufacturing firms. How many can you think of? Think of the many components that went into some of
the items you use. Do you think the items were made by machines or by hand?
If you are in a classroom with other students, see who has used the greatest number of items today. Or,
see who used the item that would be the most complex to manufacture.
If you are able, you might consider arranging a tour of a local manufacturer. Many manufacturers are
happy to give tours of the facilities and describe the many complex processes that are involved in making
the products. On your tour, take note of the many job functions that are required to make those

20

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

items—from ordering the materials to delivering to the customer.

Retail Businesses
Manufacturing businesses and retail (or merchandising) businesses are similar in that both are for-profit
businesses that sell products to consumers. In the case of manufacturing firms, by adding direct labor,
manufacturing overhead (such as utilities, rent, and depreciation), and other direct materials, raw components
are converted into a finished product that is sold to consumers. A retail business (or merchandising
business), on the other hand, is a for-profit business that purchases products (called inventory) and then
resells the products without altering them—that is, the products are sold directly to the consumer in the same
condition (production state) as purchased.
Examples of retail firms are plentiful. Automobile dealerships, clothes, cell phones, and computers are all
examples of everyday products that are purchased and sold by retail firms. What distinguishes a
manufacturing firm from a retail firm is that in a retail firm, the products are sold in the same condition as
when the products were purchased—no further alterations were made on the products.
Did you happen to notice that the product examples listed in the preceding paragraph (automobiles, clothes,
cell phones, and computers) for manufacturing firms and retail firms are identical? If so, congratulations,
because you are paying close attention to the details. These products are used as examples in two different
contexts—that is, manufacturing firms make these products, and retail firms sell these products. These
products are relevant to both manufacturing and retail because they are examples of goods that are both
manufactured and sold directly to the consumer. While there are instances when a manufacturing firm also
serves as the retail firm (Dell computers, for example), it is often the case that products will be manufactured
and sold by separate firms.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
NIKEiD
NIKEiD is a program that allows consumers to design and purchase customized equipment, clothes, and
shoes. In 2007, Nike opened its first NIKEiD studio at Niketown in New York City.

[1]

Since its debut in 1999,

the NIKEiD concept has flourished, and Nike has partnered with professional athletes to showcase their
designs that, along with featured consumer designs, are available for purchase on the NIKEiD website.

1 Nike. “Nike Opens New NIKEiD Studio in New York.” October 4, 2007. https://news.nike.com/news/nike-opens-new-nikeid-studio-in-newyork

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Figure 1.4

21

NIKEiD Launch Store in Shanghai. (credit: “Nike-id-shanghai-launch” by

“All.watson”/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
Assume you are the manager of a sporting goods store that sells Nike shoes. Think about the concept of
NIKEiD, and consider the impact that this concept might have on your store sales. Would this positively
or negatively impact the sale of Nike shoes in your store? What are steps you could take to leverage the
NIKEiD concept to help increase your own store’s sales?
Considerations like this are examples of what marketing professionals would address. Nike wants to
ensure this concept does not negatively impact the existing relationships it has, and Nike works to
ensure this program is also beneficial to its existing distribution partners.

In Merchandising Transactions you will learn about merchandising transactions, which include concepts and
specific accounting practices for retail firms. You will learn, among other things, how to account for purchasing
products from suppliers, selling the products to customers, and prepare the financial reports for retail firms.

Service Businesses
As the term implies, service businesses are businesses that provide services to customers. A major difference
between manufacturing and retail firms and service firms is that service firms do not have a tangible product
that is sold to customers. Instead, a service business does not sell tangible products to customers but rather
provides intangible benefits (services) to customers. A service business can be either a for-profit or a not-forprofit business. Figure 1.5 illustrates the distinction between manufacturing, retail, and service businesses.
Examples of service-oriented businesses include hotels, cab services, entertainment, and tax preparers.
Efficiency is one advantage service businesses offer to their customers. For example, while taxpayers can
certainly read the tax code, read the instructions, and complete the forms necessary to file their annual tax
returns, many choose to take their tax returns to a person who has specialized training and experience with

22

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

preparing tax returns. Although it is more expensive to do so, many feel it is a worthwhile investment because
the tax professional has invested the time and has the knowledge to prepare the forms properly and in a
timely manner. Hiring a tax preparer is efficient for the taxpayer because it allows the taxpayer to file the
required forms without having to invest numerous hours researching and preparing the forms.
The accounting conventions for service businesses are similar to the accounting conventions for
manufacturing and retail businesses. In fact, the accounting for service businesses is easier in one respect.
Because service businesses do not sell tangible products, there is no need to account for products that are
being held for sale (inventory). Therefore, while we briefly discuss service businesses, we’ll focus mostly on
accounting for manufacturing and retail businesses.

Figure 1.5

Manufacturing, Retail, and Service. An auto manufacturing plant, a car sales lot, and a taxi

represent three types of businesses: manufacturing, retail, and service. (credit left: modification of
“Maquiladora” by “Guldhammer”/Wikimedia Commons, CC0; credit center: modification of “Mercedes Benz
Parked” by unknown/Pixabay, CC0; credit right: modification of “Taxi Overtaking Bus” by “Kai Pilger”/Pixabay,
CC0)

YOUR TURN
Categorizing Restaurants
So far, you’ve learned about three types of for-profit businesses: manufacturing, retail, and service.
Previously, you saw how some firms such as Dell serve as both manufacturer and retailer.
Now, think of the last restaurant where you ate. Of the three business types (manufacturer, retailer, or
service provider), how would you categorize the restaurant? Is it a manufacturer? A retailer? A service
provider? Can you think of examples of how a restaurant has characteristics of all three types of
businesses?
Solution
Answers will vary. Responses may initially consider a restaurant to be only a service provider. Students
may also recognize that a restaurant possesses aspects of a manufacturer (by preparing the meals),
retailer (by selling merchandise and/or gift cards), and service provider (by waiting on customers).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

23

Governmental Entities
A governmental entity provides services to the general public (taxpayers). Governmental agencies exist at
the federal, state, and local levels. These entities are funded through the issuance of taxes and other fees.
Accountants working in governmental entities perform the same function as accountants working at for-profit
businesses. Accountants help to serve the public interest by providing to the public an accounting for the
receipts and disbursements of taxpayer dollars. Governmental leaders are accountable to taxpayers, and
accountants help assure the public that tax dollars are being utilized in an efficient manner.
Examples of governmental entities that require financial reporting include federal agencies such as the Social
Security Administration, state agencies such as the Department of Transportation, and local agencies such as
county engineers.
Students continuing their study of accounting may take a specific course or courses related to governmental
accounting. While the specific accounting used in governmental entities differs from traditional accounting
conventions, the goal of providing accurate and unbiased financial information useful for decision-making
remains the same, regardless of the type of entity. Government accounting standards are governed by the
Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). This organization creates standards that are specifically
appropriate for state and local governments in the United States.

Not-for-Profit Entities
To be fair, the name “not-for-profit” can be somewhat confusing. As with “for-profit” entities, the name refers
to the primary purpose or mission of the organization. In the case of for-profit organizations, the primary
purpose is to generate a profit. The profits, then, can be used to sustain and improve the business through
investments in employees, research, and development, and other measures intended to help ensure the longterm success of the business.
But in the case of a nonprofit (not-for-profit) organization the primary purpose or mission is to serve a
particular interest or need in the community. A not-for-profit entity tends to depend on financial longevity
based on donations, grants, and revenues generated. It may be helpful to think of not-for-profit entities as
“mission-based” entities. It is important to note that not-for-profit entities, while having a primary purpose of
serving a particular interest, also have a need for financial sustainability. An adage in the not-for-profit sector
states that “being a not-for-profit organization does not mean it is for-loss.” That is, not-for-profit entities
must also ensure that resources are used efficiently, allowing for inflows of resources to be greater than (or, at
a minimum, equal to) outflows of resources. This allows the organization to continue and perhaps expand its
valuable mission.
Examples of not-for-profit entities are numerous. Food banks have as a primary purpose the collection,
storage, and distribution of food to those in need. Charitable foundations have as a primary purpose the
provision of funding to local agencies that support specific community needs, such as reading and after-school
programs. Many colleges and universities are structured as not-for-profit entities because the primary
purpose is to provide education and research opportunities.
Similar to accounting for governmental entities, students continuing their study of accounting may take a
specific course or courses related to not-for-profit accounting. While the specific accounting used in not-forprofit entities differs slightly from traditional accounting conventions, the goal of providing reliable and
unbiased financial information useful for decision-making is vitally important. Some of the governmental and
regulatory entities involved in maintaining the rules and principles in accounting are discussed in Explain Why

24

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Accounting Is Important to Business Stakeholders.

YOUR TURN
Types of Organizations
Think of the various organizations discussed so far. Now try to identify people in your personal and
professional network who work for these types of agencies. Can you think of someone in a career at each
of these types of organizations?
One way to explore career paths is to talk with professionals who work in the areas that interest you. You
may consider reaching out to the individuals you identified and learning more about the work that they
do. Find out about the positive and negative aspects of the work. Find out what advice they have relating
to education. Try to gain as much information as you can to determine whether that is a career you can
envision yourself pursuing. Also, ask about opportunities for job shadowing, co-ops, or internships
Solution
Answers will vary, but this should be an opportunity to learn about careers in a variety of organizations
(for-profit including manufacturing, retail, and services; not-for-profit; and governmental agencies). You
may have an assumption about a career that is based only on the positive aspects. Learning from
experienced professionals may help you understand all aspects of the careers. In addition, this exercise
may help you confirm or alter your potential career path, including the preparation required (based on
advice given from those you talk with).

1.4

Explain Why Accounting Is Important to Business Stakeholders

The number of decisions we make in a single day is staggering. For example, think about what you had for
breakfast this morning. What pieces of information factored into that decision? A short list might include the
foods that were available in your home, the amount of time you had to prepare and eat the food, and what
sounded good to eat this morning. Let’s say you do not have much food in your home right now because you
are overdue on a trip to the grocery store. Deciding to grab something at a local restaurant involves an entirely
new set of choices. Can you think of some of the factors that might influence the decision to grab a meal at a
local restaurant?

YOUR TURN
Daily Decisions
Many academic studies have been conducted on the topic of consumer behavior and decision-making. It
is a fascinating topic of study that attempts to learn what type of advertising works best, the best place
to locate a business, and many other business-related activities.
One such study, conducted by researchers at Cornell University, concluded that people make more than
200 food-related decisions per day.

[2]

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

25

This is astonishing considering the number of decisions found in this particular study related only to
decisions involving food. Imagine how many day-to-day decisions involve other issues that are important
to us, such as what to wear and how to get from point A to point B. For this exercise, provide and discuss
some of the food-related decisions that you recently made.
Solution
In consideration of food-related decisions, there are many options you can consider. For example, what
types, in terms of ethnic groups or styles, do you prefer? Do you want a dining experience or just
something inexpensive and quick? Do you have allergy-related food issues? These are just a few of the
myriad potential decisions you might make.

It is no different when it comes to financial decisions. Decision makers rely on unbiased, relevant, and timely
financial information in order to make sound decisions. In this context, the term stakeholder refers to a
person or group who relies on financial information to make decisions, since they often have an interest in the
economic viability of an organization or business. Stakeholders may be stockholders, creditors, governmental
and regulatory agencies, customers, management and other employees, and various other parties and
entities.

Stockholders
A stockholder is an owner of stock in a business. Owners are called stockholders because in exchange for
cash, they are given an ownership interest in the business, called stock. Stock is sometimes referred to as
“shares.” Historically, stockholders received paper certificates reflecting the number of stocks owned in the
business. Now, many stock transactions are recorded electronically. Introduction to Financial Statements
discusses stock in more detail. Corporation Accounting offers a more extensive exploration of the types of
stock as well as the accounting related to stock transactions.
Recall that organizations can be classified as for-profit, governmental, or not-for-profit entities. Stockholders
are associated with for-profit businesses. While governmental and not-for-profit entities have constituents,
there is no direct ownership associated with these entities.
For-profit businesses are organized into three categories: manufacturing, retail (or merchandising), and
service. Another way to categorize for-profit businesses is based on the availability of the company stock (see
Table 1.1). A publicly traded company is one whose stock is traded (bought and sold) on an organized stock
exchange such as the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) or the National Association of Securities Dealers
Automated Quotation (NASDAQ) system. Most large, recognizable companies are publicly traded, meaning the
stock is available for sale on these exchanges. A privately held company, in contrast, is one whose stock is
not available to the general public. Privately held companies, while accounting for the largest number of
businesses and employment in the United States, are often smaller (based on value) than publicly traded
companies. Whereas financial information and company stock of publicly traded companies are available to
those inside and outside of the organization, financial information and company stock of privately held
companies are often limited exclusively to employees at a certain level within the organization as a part of
compensation and incentive packages or selectively to individuals or groups (such as banks or other lenders)
outside the organization.

2

B. Wansink and J. Sobal. “Mindless Eating: The 200 Daily Food Decisions We Overlook.” 2007. Environment & Behavior, 39[1], 106–123.

26

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Publicly Held versus Privately Held Companies
Publicly Held Company

Privately Held Company

• Stock available to general public

• Stock not available to general public

• Financial information public

• Financial information private

• Typically larger in value

• Typically smaller in value

Table 1.1
Whether the stock is owned by a publicly traded or privately held company, owners use financial information
to make decisions. Owners use the financial information to assess the financial performance of the business
and make decisions such as whether or not to purchase additional stock, sell existing stock, or maintain the
current level of stock ownership.
Other decisions stockholders make may be influenced by the type of company. For example, stockholders of
privately held companies often are also employees of the company, and the decisions they make may be
related to day-to-day activities as well as longer-term strategic decisions. Owners of publicly traded
companies, on the other hand, will usually only focus on strategic issues such as the company leadership,
purchases of other businesses, and executive compensation arrangements. In essence, stockholders
predominantly focus on profitability, expected increase in stock value, and corporate stability.

Creditors and Lenders
In order to provide goods and services to their customers, businesses make purchases from other businesses.
These purchases come in the form of materials used to make finished goods or resell, office equipment such
as copiers and telephones, utility services such as heating and cooling, and many other products and services
that are vital to run the business efficiently and effectively.
It is rare that payment is required at the time of the purchase or when the service is provided. Instead,
businesses usually extend “credit” to other businesses. Selling and purchasing on credit, which is explored
further in Merchandising Transactions and Accounting for Receivables, means the payment is expected after a
certain period of time following receipt of the goods or provision of the service. The term creditor refers to a
business that grants extended payment terms to other businesses. The time frame for extended credit to
other businesses for purchases of goods and services is usually very short, typically thirty-day to forty-five-day
periods are common.
When businesses need to borrow larger amounts of money and/or for longer periods of time, they will often
borrow money from a lender, a bank or other institution that has the primary purpose of lending money with
a specified repayment period and stated interest rate. If you or your family own a home, you may already be
familiar with lending institutions. The time frame for borrowing from lenders is typically measured in years
rather than days, as was the case with creditors. While lending arrangements vary, typically the borrower is
required to make periodic, scheduled payments with the full amount being repaid by a certain date. In
addition, since the borrowing is for a long period of time, lending institutions require the borrower to pay a fee
(called interest) for the use of borrowing. These concepts and the related accounting practices are covered in
Long-Term Liabilities. Table 1.2 Summarizes the differences between creditors and lenders.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

27

Creditor versus Lender
Creditor

Lender

• Business that grants extended payment terms to other

• Bank or other institution that lends

businesses
• Shorter time frame

money
• Longer time frame

Table 1.2
Both creditors and lenders use financial information to make decisions. The ultimate decision that both
creditors and lenders have to make is whether or not the funds will be repaid by the borrower. The reason this
is important is because lending money involves risk. The type of risk creditors and lenders assess is repayment
risk—the risk the funds will not be repaid. As a rule, the longer the money is borrowed, the higher the risk
involved.
Recall that accounting information is historical in nature. While historical performance is no guarantee of
future performance (repayment of borrowed funds, in this case), an established pattern of financial
performance using historical accounting information does help creditors and lenders to assess the likelihood
the funds will be repaid, which, in turn, helps them to determine how much money to lend, how long to lend
the money for, and how much interest (in the case of lenders) to charge the borrower.

Sources of Funding
Besides borrowing, there are other options for businesses to obtain or raise additional funding (also often
labeled as capital). It is important for the business student to understand that businesses generally have three
ways to raise capital: profitable operations is the first option; selling ownership—stock—which is also called
equity financing, is the second option; and borrowing from lenders (called debt financing) is the final option.
In Introduction to Financial Statements, you’ll learn more about the business concept called “profit.” You are
already aware of the concept of profit. In short, profit means the inflows of resources are greater than the
outflow of resources, or stated in more business-like terms, the revenues that the company generates are
larger or greater than the expenses. For example, if a retailer buys a printer for $150 and sells it for $320, then
from the sale it would have revenue of $320 and expenses of $150, for a profit of $170. (Actually, the process is
a little more complicated because there would typically be other expenses for the operation of the store.
However, to keep the example simple, those were not included. You’ll learn more about this later in the
course.)
Developing and maintaining profitable operations (selling goods and services) typically provides businesses
with resources to use for future projects such as hiring additional workers, maintaining equipment, or
expanding a warehouse. While profitable operations are valuable to businesses, companies often want to
engage in projects that are very expensive and/or are time sensitive. Businesses, then, have other options to
raise funds quickly, such as selling stock and borrowing from lenders, as previously discussed.
An advantage of selling stock to raise capital is that the business is not committed to a specific payback
schedule. A disadvantage of issuing new stock is that the administrative costs (legal and compliance) are high,
which makes it an expensive way to raise capital.
There are two advantages to raising money by borrowing from lenders. One advantage is that the process,

28

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

relative to profitable operations and selling ownership, is quicker. As you’ve learned, lenders (and creditors)
review financial information provided by the business in order to make assessments on whether or not to lend
money to the business, how much money to lend, and the acceptable length of time to lend. A second, and
related, advantage of raising capital through borrowing is that it is fairly inexpensive. A disadvantage of
borrowing money from lenders is the repayment commitments. Because lenders require the funds to be
repaid within a specific time frame, the risk to the business (and, in turn, to the lender) increases.
These topics are covered extensively in the area of study called corporate finance. While finance and
accounting are similar in many aspects, in practicality finance and accounting are separate disciplines that
frequently work in coordination in a business setting. Students may be interested to learn more about the
educational and career options in the field of corporate finance. Because there are many similarities in the
study of finance and accounting, many college students double major in a combination of finance, accounting,
economics, and information systems.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Profit
What is profit? In accounting, there is general consensus on the definition of profit. A typical definition of
profit is, in effect, when inflows of cash or other resources are greater than outflows of resources.
Ken Blanchard provides another way to define profit. Blanchard is the author of The One Minute Manager,
a popular leadership book published in 1982. He is often quoted as saying, “profit is the applause you get
for taking care of your customers and creating a motivating environment for your people [employees].”
Blanchard’s definition recognizes the multidimensional aspect of profit, which requires successful
businesses to focus on their customers, employees, and the community.
Check out this short video of Blanchard’s definition of profit (https://openstax.org/l/50Blanchard) for
more information. What are alternative approaches to defining profit?

Governmental and Regulatory Agencies
Publicly traded companies are required to file financial and other informational reports with the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC), a federal regulatory agency that regulates corporations with shares listed
and traded on security exchanges through required periodic filings Figure 1.6. The SEC accomplishes this in
two primary ways: issuing regulations and providing oversight of financial markets. The goal of these actions
is to help ensure that businesses provide investors with access to transparent and unbiased financial
information.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Figure 1.6

29

Securities and Exchange Commission. (credit: “Seal of the United States Securities and Exchange

Commission” by U.S. Government/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
As an example of its responsibility to issue regulations, you learn in Introduction to Financial Statements that
the SEC is responsible for establishing guidelines for the accounting profession. These are called accounting
standards or generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Although the SEC also had the responsibility of
issuing standards for the auditing profession, they relinquished this responsibility to the Financial Accounting
Standards Board (FASB).
In addition, you will learn in Describe the Varied Career Paths Open to Individuals with an Accounting
Education that auditors are accountants charged with providing reasonable assurance to users that financial
statements are prepared according to accounting standards. This oversight is administered through the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), which was established in 2002.
The SEC also has responsibility for regulating firms that issue and trade (buy and sell) securities—stocks,
bonds, and other investment instruments.
Enforcement by the SEC takes many forms. According to the SEC website, “Each year the SEC brings hundreds
of civil enforcement actions against individuals and companies for violation of the securities laws. Typical
infractions include insider trading, accounting fraud, and providing false or misleading information about
securities and the companies that issue them.”

[3]

Financial information is a valuable tool that is part of the

investigatory and enforcement activities of the SEC.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Financial Professionals and Fraud
You may have heard the name Bernard “Bernie” Madoff. Madoff (Figure 1.7) was the founder of an
investment firm, Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities. The original mission of the firm was to provide
financial advice and investment services to clients. This is a valuable service to many people because of
the complexity of financial investments and retirement planning. Many people rely on financial
professionals, like Bernie Madoff, to help them create wealth and be in a position to retire comfortably.
Unfortunately, Madoff took advantage of the trust of his investors and was ultimately convicted of
stealing (embezzling) over $50 billion (a low amount by some estimates). Madoff’s embezzlement
remains one of the biggest financial frauds in US history.

3

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “What We Do.” June 10, 2013. https://www.sec.gov/Article/whatwedo.html

30

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Figure 1.7

Bernie Madoff. Bernie Madoff’s mug shot upon being arrested in March 2009. (credit:

“BernardMadoff” by U.S. Department of Justice/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
The fraud scheme was initially uncovered by a financial analyst named Harry Markopolos. Markopolos
became suspicious because Madoff’s firm purported to achieve for its investors abnormally high rates of
return for an extended period of time. After analyzing the investment returns, Markopolos reported the
suspicious activity to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which has enforcement
responsibility for firms providing investment services. While Madoff was initially able to stay a few steps
ahead of the SEC, he was charged in 2009 and will spend the rest of his life in prison.
There are many resources to explore the Madoff scandal. You might be interested in reading the book,
No One Would Listen: A True Financial Thriller, written by Harry Markopolos. A movie and a TV series have
also been made about the Madoff scandal.

In addition to governmental and regulatory agencies at the federal level, many state and local agencies use
financial information to accomplish the mission of protecting the public interest. The primary goals are to
ensure the financial information is prepared according to the relevant rules or practices as well as to ensure
funds are being used in an efficient and transparent manner. For example, local school district administrators
should ensure that financial information is available to the residents and is presented in an unbiased manner.
The residents want to know their tax dollars are not being wasted. Likewise, the school district administrators
want to demonstrate they are using the funding in an efficient and effective manner. This helps ensure a good
relationship with the community that fosters trust and support for the school system.

Customers
Depending on the perspective, the term customers can have different meanings. Consider for a moment a
retail store that sells electronics. That business has customers that purchase its electronics. These customers
are considered the end users of the product. The customers, knowingly or unknowingly, have a stake in the
financial performance of the business. The customers benefit when the business is financially successful.
Profitable businesses will continue to sell the products the customers want, maintain and improve the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

31

business facilities, provide employment for community members, and undertake many other activities that
contribute to a vibrant and thriving community.
Businesses are also customers. In the example of the electronics store, the business purchases its products
from other businesses, including the manufacturers of the electronics. Just as end-user customers have a
vested interest in the financial success of the business, business customers also benefit from suppliers that
have financial success. A supplier that is financially successful will help ensure the electronics will continue to
be available to purchase and resell to the end-use customer, investments in emerging technologies will be
made, and improvements in delivery and customer service will result. This, in turn, helps the retail electronics
store remain cost competitive while being able to offer its customers a wide variety of products.

Managers and Other Employees
Employees have a strong interest in the financial performance of the organizations for which they work. At the
most basic level, employees want to know their jobs will be secure so they can continue to be paid for their
work. In addition, employees increase their value to the organization through their years of service, improving
knowledge and skills, and accepting positions of increased responsibility. An organization that is financially
successful is able to reward employees for that commitment to the organization through bonuses and
increased pay.
In addition to promotional and compensation considerations, managers and others in the organization have
the responsibility to make day-to-day and long-term (strategic) decisions for the organization. Understanding
financial information is vital to making good organizational decisions.
Not all decisions, however, are based on strictly financial information. Recall that managers and other decision
makers often use nonfinancial, or managerial, information. These decisions take into account other relevant
factors that may not have an immediate and direct link to the financial reports. It is important to understand
that sound organizational decisions are often (and should be) based on both financial and nonfinancial
information.
In addition to exploring managerial accounting concepts, you will also learn some of the common techniques
that are used to analyze the financial reports of businesses. Appendix A further explores these techniques and
how stakeholders can use these techniques for making financial decisions.

IFRS CONNECTION
Introduction to International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)
In the past fifty years, rapid advances in communications and technology have led the economy to
become more global with companies buying, selling, and providing services to customers all over the
world. This increase in globalization creates a greater need for users of financial information to be able
to compare and evaluate global companies. Investors, creditors, and management may encounter a
need to assess a company that operates outside of the United States.
For many years, the ability to compare financial statements and financial ratios of a company
headquartered in the United States with a similar company headquartered in another country, such as
Japan, was challenging, and only those educated in the accounting rules of both countries could easily

32

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

handle the comparison. Discussions about creating a common set of international accounting standards
that would apply to all publicly traded companies have been occurring since the 1950s and post–World
War II economic growth, but only minimal progress was made. In 2002, the Financial Accounting
Standards Board (FASB) and the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) began working more
closely together to create a common set of accounting rules. Since 2002, the two organizations have
released many accounting standards that are identical or similar, and they continue to work toward
unifying or aligning standards, thus improving financial statement comparability between countries.
Why create a common set of international standards? As previously mentioned, the global nature of
business has increased the need for comparability across companies in different countries. Investors in
the United States may want to choose between investing in a US-based company or one based in France.
A US company may desire to buy out a company located in Brazil. A Mexican-based company may desire
to borrow money from a bank in London. These types of activities require knowledge of financial
statements. Prior to the creation of IFRS, most countries had their own form of generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP). This made it difficult for an investor in the United States to analyze or
understand the financials of a France-based company or for a bank in London to know all of the nuances
of financial statements from a Mexican company. Another reason common international rules are
important is the need for similar reporting for similar business models. For example, Nestlé and the
Hershey Company are in different countries yet have similar business models; the same applies to
Daimler and Ford Motor Company. In these and other instances, despite the similar business models, for
many years these companies reported their results differently because they were governed by different
GAAP—Nestlé by French GAAP, Daimler by German GAAP, and both the Hershey Company and Ford
Motor Company by US GAAP. Wouldn’t it make sense that these companies should report the results of
their operations in a similar manner since their business models are similar? The globalization of the
economy and the need for similar reporting across business models are just two of the reasons why the
push for unified standards took a leap forward in the early twenty-first century.
Today, more than 120 countries have adopted all or most of IFRS or permit the use of IFRS for financial
reporting. The United States, however, has not adopted IFRS as an acceptable method of GAAP for
financial statement preparation and presentation purposes but has worked closely with the IASB. Thus,
many US standards are very comparable to the international standards. Interestingly, the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) allows foreign companies that are traded on US exchanges to present their
statements under IFRS rules without restating to US GAAP. This occurred in 2009 and was an important
move by the SEC to show solidarity toward creating financial statement comparability across countries.
Throughout this text, “IFRS Connection” feature boxes will discuss the important similarities and most
significant differences between reporting using US GAAP as created by FASB and IFRS as created by IASB.
For now, know that it is important for anyone in business, not just accountants, to be aware of some of
the primary similarities and differences between IFRS and US GAAP, because these differences can
impact analysis and decision-making.

1.5

Describe the Varied Career Paths Open to Individuals with an Accounting

Education
There are often misunderstandings on what exactly accountants do or what attributes are necessary for a

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

33

successful career in accounting. Often, people perceive accountants as “number-crunchers” or “bean
counters” who sit behind a desk, working with numbers, and having little interaction with others. The fact is
that this perception could not be further from the truth.

Personal Attributes
While it is true that accountants often work independently, much of the work that accountants undertake
involves interactions with other people. In fact, accountants frequently need to gather information from others
and explain complex financial concepts to others, making excellent written and verbal communication skills a
must. In addition, accountants often deal with strict deadlines such as tax filings, making prioritizing work
commitments and being goal oriented necessities. In addition to these skills, traditionally, an accountant can
be described as someone who
• is goal oriented,
• is a problem solver,
• is organized and analytical,
• has good interpersonal skills,
• pays attention to detail,
• has good time-management skills, and
• is outgoing.
The Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA), the governing body of the global Chartered
Certified Accountant (CCA) designation, and the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA), the governing
body of the Certified Management Accountant (CMA) designation, conducted a study to research the skills
accountants will need given a changing economic and technological context. The findings indicate that, in
addition to the traditional personal attributes, accountants should possess “traits such as entrepreneurship,
curiosity, creativity, and strategic thinking.”

[4]

Education
Entry-level positions in the accounting profession usually require a minimum of a bachelor’s degree. For
advanced positions, firms may consider factors such as years of experience, professional development,
certifications, and advanced degrees, such as a master’s or doctorate. The specific factors regarding
educational requirements depend on the industry and the specific business.
After earning a bachelor’s degree, many students decide to continue their education by earning a master’s
degree. A common question for students is when to begin a master’s program, either entering a master’s
program immediately after earning a bachelor’s degree or first entering the profession and pursuing a
master’s at a later point. On one hand, there are benefits of entering into a master’s program immediately
after earning a bachelor’s degree, mainly that students are already into the rhythm of being a full-time
student so an additional year or so in a master’s program is appealing. On the other hand, entering the
profession directly after earning a bachelor’s degree allows the student to gain valuable professional
experience that may enrich the graduate education experience. When to enter a graduate program is not an
easy decision. There are pros and cons to either position. In essence, the final decision depends on the
personal perspective and alternatives available to the individual student. For example, one student might not

4 The Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA) and The Association of Accountants and Financial Professionals in Business
(IMA). “100 Drivers of Change for the Global Accountancy Profession.” September 2012. https://www.imanet.org/insights-and-trends/thefuture-of-management-accounting/100-drivers-of-change-for-the-global-accountancy-profession?ssopc=1

34

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

have the financial resources to continue immediately on to graduate school and will first need to work to fund
additional education, while another student might have outside suppliers of resources or is considering taking
on additional student loan debt. The best recommendation for these students is to consider all of the factors
and realize that they must make the final decision as to their own best alternative. It is also important to note
that if one makes the decision to enter public accounting, as all states require 150 hours of education to earn a
Certified Public Accountant (CPA) license, it is customary for regional and national public accounting firms to
require a master’s degree or 150 hours earned by other means as a condition for employment; this may
influence your decision to enter a master’s degree program as soon as the bachelor’s degree is complete.

Related Careers
An accounting degree is a valuable tool for other professions too. A thorough understanding of accounting
provides the student with a comprehensive understanding of business activity and the importance of financial
information to make informed decisions. While an accounting degree is a necessity to work in the accounting
profession, it also provides a solid foundation for other careers, such as financial analysts, personal financial
planners, and business executives. The number of career options may seem overwhelming at this point, and a
career in the accounting profession is no exception. The purpose of this section is to simply highlight the vast
number of options that an accounting degree offers. In the workforce, accounting professionals can find a
career that best fits their interests.
Students may also be interested in learning more about professional certifications in the areas of financial
analysis (Chartered Financial Analyst) and personal financial planning (Certified Financial Planner), which are
discussed later in this section.

Major Categories of Accounting Functions
It is a common perception that an accounting career means preparing tax returns. While numerous
accountants do prepare tax returns, many people are surprised to learn of the variety of career paths that are
available within the accounting profession. An accounting degree is a valuable tool that gives accountants a
high level of flexibility and many options. Often individual accountants apply skills in several of the following
career paths simultaneously. Figure 1.8 illustrates some of the many career paths open to accounting
students.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Figure 1.8

35

Career Paths. There are many career paths open to students of accounting. (attribution:

Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Auditing
Auditing, which is performed by accountants with a specialized skill set, is the process of ensuring activities
are carried out as intended or designed. There are many examples of the functions that auditors perform. For
example, in a manufacturing company, auditors may sample products and assess whether or not the products
conform to the customer specifications. As another example, county auditors may test pumps at gas stations
to ensure the pumps are delivering the correct amount of gasoline and charging customers correctly.
Companies should develop policies and procedures to help ensure the company’s goals are being met and the
assets are protected. This is called the internal control system. To help maintain the effectiveness of the
internal control system, companies often hire internal auditors, who evaluate internal controls through
reviews and tests. For example, internal auditors may review the process of how cash is handled within a
business. In this scenario, the goal of the company is to ensure that all cash payments are properly applied to
customer accounts and that all funds are properly deposited into the company’s bank account. As another
example, internal auditors may review the shipping and receiving process to ensure that all products shipped
or received have the proper paperwork and the product is handled and stored properly. While internal
auditors also often work to ensure compliance with external regulations, the primary goal of internal auditors
is to help ensure the company policies are followed, which helps the company attain its strategic goals and
protect its assets. The professional certification most relevant to a career in internal audit is the Certified
Internal Auditor (CIA). Financial fraud occurs when an individual or individuals act with intent to deceive for a
financial gain. A Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE) is trained to prevent fraud from occurring and to detect when
fraud has occurred. A thorough discussion of the internal control system and the role of accountants occurs in
Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash.
Companies also want to ensure the financial statements provided to outside parties such as banks,
governmental agencies, and the investing public are reliable and consistent. That is, companies have a desire
to provide financial statements that are free of errors or fraud. Since internal auditors are committed to
providing unbiased financial information, it would be possible for the company to use internal auditors to
attest to the integrity of the company’s financial statements. With that said, doing so presents the appearance

36

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

of a possibility of a conflict of interest and could call into question the validity of the financial statements.
Therefore, companies hire external auditors to review and attest to the integrity of the financial statements.
External auditors typically work for a public accounting firm. Although the public accounting firm is hired by
the company to attest to the fairness of the financial statements, the external auditors are independent of the
company and provide an unbiased opinion.

Taxation
There are many taxes that businesses are required to pay. Examples include income taxes, payroll and related
taxes such as workers’ compensation and unemployment, property and inventory taxes, and sales and use
taxes. In addition to making the tax payments, many of the taxes require tax returns and other paperwork to
be completed. Making things even more complicated is the fact that taxes are levied at the federal, state, and
local levels. For larger worldwide companies, the work needed to meet their international tax compliance
requirements can take literally thousands of hours of accountants’ time. To sum up the process, the goal of tax
accountants is to help ensure the taxes are paid properly and in a timely manner, from an individual level all
the way to the company level (including at the level of such companies as Apple and Walmart).
Since accountants have an understanding of various tax laws and filing deadlines, they are also wellpositioned to offer tax planning advice. Tax laws are complex and change frequently; therefore, it is helpful for
businesses to include tax considerations in their short- and long-term planning. Accountants are a valuable
resource in helping businesses minimize the tax liability.
Many businesses find it necessary to employ accountants to work on tax compliance and planning on a fulltime basis. Other businesses need these services on a periodic (quarterly or annual) basis and hire external
accountants accordingly.

Financial Accounting
Financial accounting measures, in dollars, the activities of an organization. Financial accounting is historical in
nature and is prepared using standard conventions, called accounting standards or GAAP. Because nearly
every activity in an organization has a financial implication, financial accounting might be thought of as a
“monetary scorecard.”
Financial accounting is used internally by managers and other decision makers to validate activities that were
done well and to highlight areas that need adjusted in the future. Businesses often use discretion as to how
much and with whom financial accounting information is shared.
Financial accounting is also provided to those outside the organization. For a publicly traded company, issuing
financial statements is required by the SEC. Sharing financial information for a privately held company is
usually reserved for those instances where the information is required, such as for audits or obtaining loans.

Consulting
Because nearly every activity within an organization has a financial implication, accountants have a unique
opportunity to gain a comprehensive view of an organization. Accountants are able to see how one area of a
business affects a different aspect of the business. As accountants gain experience in the profession, this
unique perspective allows them to build a “knowledge database” that is valuable to businesses. In this
capacity, accountants can provide consulting services, which means giving advice or guidance to managers
and other decision makers on the impact (both financial and nonfinancial) of a potential course of action. This
role allows the organization to gain knowledge from the accountants in a way that minimizes risk and/or

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

37

financial investment.
As discussed previously, accountants may advise a business on tax-related issues. Other examples of
consultative services that accountants perform include selection and installation of computer software
applications and other technology considerations, review of internal controls, determination of compliance
with relevant laws and regulations, review of compensation and incentive arrangements, and consideration of
operational efficiencies within the production process.

Accounting Information Services
Computers are an integral part of business. Computers and related software programs allow companies to
efficiently record, store, and process valuable data and information relevant to the business. Accountants are
often an integral part of the selection and maintenance of the company’s computerized accounting and
information system. The goal of the accounting information system is to efficiently provide relevant
information to internal decision makers, and it is important for businesses to stay abreast of advances in
technology and invest in those technologies that help the business remain efficient and competitive.
Significant growth is expected in accounting information systems careers. According to the US Bureau of
Labor Statistics, in 2010 there were over 130,000 jobs in the accounting informations systems sector, with over
49% growth expected through 2024. Median earnings in this field were over $73,000 in 2011.

[5]

For those

interested in both accounting and computer information systems, there are tremendous career opportunities.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Enterprise Resource Planning
As companies grow in size and expand geographically, it is important to assess whether or not a current
computerized system is the right size and fit for the organization. For example, a company with a single
location can easily manage its business activities with a small, off-the-shelf software package such as
QuickBooks and software applications such as Microsoft Excel. A company’s computer system becomes
more complex when additional locations are added.

5 Lauren Csorny. “Careers in the Growing Field of Information Technology Services.” Bureau of Labor Statistics/U.S. Department of Labor.
April 2013. https://www.bls.gov/opub/btn/volume-2/careers-in-growing-field-of-information-technology-services.htm

38

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Figure 1.9

Growth. (credit: “Statistics Arrows Trends” by “geralt”/Pixabay, CC0)

As companies continue to grow, larger integrated computer systems, called enterprise resource planning
(ERP) systems, may be implemented. Enterprise resource planning systems are designed to maintain the
various aspects of the business within a single integrated computer system. For example, a leading ERP
system is Microsoft Dynamics GP. Microsoft Dynamics GP is an integrated sytem with the capability to
handle the human resource management, production, accounting, manufacturing, and many other
aspects of a business. ERP systems, like Microsoft Dynamics GP, are also designed to accommodate
companies that have international locations. The benefit of ERP systems is that information is efficiently
stored and utilized across the entire business in real time.

Cost and Managerial Accounting
Cost accounting and managerial accounting are related, but different, types of accounting. In essence, a
primary distinction between the two functions is that cost accounting takes a primarily quantitative approach,
whereas managerial accounting takes both quantitative and qualitative approaches. The goal of cost
accounting is to determine the costs involved with providing goods and services. In a manufacturing business,
cost accounting is the recording and tracking of costs such as direct materials, employee wages, and supplies
used in the manufacturing process.
Managerial accounting uses cost accounting and other financial accounting information, as well as
nonfinancial information, to make short-term as well as strategic and other long-term decisions for a business.
Both cost and managerial accounting are intended to be used inside a business. Along with financial
accounting information, managers and other decision makers within a business use the information to
facilitate decision-making, develop long-term plans, and perform other functions necessary for the success of
the business.
There are two major differences between cost and managerial accounting and financial accounting. Whereas
financial accounting requires the use of standard accounting conventions (also called accounting standards or
GAAP), there are no such requirements for cost and managerial accounting. In practice, management has
different needs that require cost and managerial accounting information. In addition, financial information is
prepared in specific intervals of time, usually monthly. The same is not true with cost and managerial

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

39

accounting, which are prepared on an as-needed basis that is not reported as specific periods of time.
An example may be helpful in clarifying the difference between cost and managerial accounting.
Manufacturing companies often face the decision of whether to make certain components or purchase the
components from an outside supplier. Cost accounting would calculate the cost of each alternative.
Managerial accounting would use that cost and supplement the cost with nonfinancial information to arrive at
a decision. Let’s say the cost accountants determine that a company would save $0.50 per component if the
units were purchased from an outside supplier rather than being produced by the company. Managers would
use the $0.50 per piece savings as well as nonfinancial considerations, such as the impact on the morale of
current employees and the supplier’s ability to produce a quality product, to make a decision whether or not
to purchase the component from the outside supplier.
In summary, it may be helpful to think of cost accounting as a subset of managerial accounting. Another way
to think about cost and managerial accounting is that the result of cost accounting is a number, whereas the
result of managerial accounting is a decision.

Financial Planning
While accountants spend much of their time interacting with other people, a large component of their work
involves numbers and finances. As mentioned previously, many people with an interest in data often go into
the accounting profession and have a natural inclination toward solving problems. In addition, accountants
also gain a comprehensive view of business. They understand how the diverse aspects of the business are
connected and how those activities ultimately have a financial impact on the organization.
These attributes allow accountants to offer expertise in financial planning, which takes many forms. Within a
business, making estimates and establishing a plan for the future—called a budget—are vital. These actions
allow the business to determine the appropriate level of activity and make any adjustments accordingly.
Training in accounting is also helpful for those who offer financial planning for individuals. When it comes to
investing and saving for the future, there are many options available to individuals. Investing is complicated,
and many people want help from someone who understands the complexities of the investment options, the
tax implications, and ways to invest and build wealth. Accountants are well trained to offer financial planning
services to the businesses they work with as well as individuals investing for their future.

Entrepreneurship
Many people have an idea for a product or service and decide to start their own business—they are often
labeled as entrepreneurs. These individuals have a passion for their product or service and are experts at what
they do. But that is not enough. In order for the business to be successful, the entrepreneur must understand
all aspects of the business, including and especially the financial aspect. It is important for the entrepreneur to
understand how to obtain the funding to start the business, measure the financial performance of the
business, and know what adjustments to improve the performance of the business are necessary and when to
make them. Understanding accounting, or hiring accountants who can perform these activities, is valuable to
the entrepreneur. An entrepreneur works extremely hard and has often taken a great risk in starting his or her
own business. Understanding the financial performance of the business helps ensure the business is
successful.

40

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurs do not have to develop a brand new product or service in order to open their own
business. Often entrepreneurs decide to purchase a store from a business that already exists. This is
called a franchise arrangement. In these arrangements, the business owner (the franchisee) typically
pays the franchisor (the business offering the franchise opportunity) a lump sum at the beginning of the
arrangement. This lump sum payment allows the franchisee an opportunity to use the store logos and
receive training, consulting, and other support from the franchisor. A series of scheduled payments is
also common. The ongoing payments are often based on a percentage of the franchise store’s sales.
The franchise arrangement is beneficial to both parties. For the franchisee, there is less risk involved
because they often purchase a franchise from a business with an established track record of success. For
the franchisor, it is an opportunity to build the brand without the responsbility of direct oversight for
individual stores—each franchise is independently owned and operated (a phrase you might see on
franchise stores).
The downside of the franchising arrangement is the amount of money that is paid to the franchisor
through the initial lump sum as well as continued payments. These costs, however, are necessary for the
ongoing support from the franchisor. In addition, franchisees often have restrictions relative to product
pricing and offerings, geographic locations, and approved suppliers.
According to Entrepreneur.com, based on factors such as costs and fees, support, and brand strength,
the number one–ranking franchise in 2017 was 7-Eleven, Inc. According to the website, 7-Eleven has been
franchising since 1964 and has 61,086 franchise stores worldwide (7,025 are located in the United States).
In addition, 7-Eleven has 1,019 company-owned stores.

[6]

Major Categories of Employers
Now that you’ve learned about the various career paths that accountants can take, let’s briefly look at the
types of organizations that accountants can work for. Figure 1.10 illustrates some common types of employers
that require accountants. While this is not an all-inclusive list, most accountants in the profession are
employed by these types of organizations.

6

“7-Eleven.” Entrepreneur.com. n.d. https://www.entrepreneur.com/franchises/7eleveninc/282052

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Figure 1.10

41

Accountant Employer Types. Accountants may find employment within a variety of types of

entities. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Public Accounting Firms
Public accounting firms offer a wide range of accounting, auditing, consulting, and tax preparation services to
their clients. A small business might use a public accounting firm to prepare the monthly or quarterly financial
statements and/or the payroll. A business (of any size) might hire the public accounting firm to audit the
company financial statements or verify that policies and procedures are being followed properly. Public
accounting firms may also offer consulting services to their clients to advise them on implementing
computerized systems or strengthening the internal control system. (Note that you will learn in your advanced
study of accounting that accountants have legal limitations on what consulting services they can provide to
their clients.) Public accounting firms also offer tax preparation services for their business and individual
clients. Public accounting firms may also offer business valuation, forensic accounting (financial crimes), and
other services.
Public accounting firms are often categorized based on the size (revenue). The biggest firms are referred to as
the “Big Four” and include Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited (DTTL), PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), Ernst &
Young (EY), and KPMG. Following the Big Four in size are firms such as RSM US, Grant Thornton, BDO USA,
Crowe, and CliftonLarsonAllen (CLA).

[7]

There are also many other regional and local public accounting firms.

Public accounting firms often expect the accountants they employ to have earned (or will earn) the Certified
Public Accountant (CPA) designation. It is not uncommon for public accounting firms to specialize. For
example, some public accounting firms may specialize in serving clients in the banking or aerospace
industries. In addition to specializing in specific industries, public accounting firms may also specialize in areas
of accounting such as tax compliance and planning.
Hiring public accounting firms to perform various services is an attractive option for many businesses. The
primary benefit is that the business has access to experts in the profession without needing to hire accounting

7 “2017 Top 100 Firms.” Accounting Today. 2017. https://lscpagepro.mydigitalpublication.com/
publication/?i=390208#{%22issue_id%22:390208,%22page%22:0}

42

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

specialists on a full-time basis.

Corporations
Corporations hire accountants to perform various functions within the business. The primary responsibility of
corporate accountants (which include cost and managerial accountants) is to provide information for internal
users and decision makers, as well as implement and monitor internal controls. The information provided by
corporate accountants takes many forms. For example, some of the common responsibilities of corporate
accountants include calculating and tracking the costs of providing goods and services, analyzing the financial
performance of the business in comparison to expectations, and developing budgets, which help the company
plan for future operations and make any necessary adjustments. In addition, many corporate accountants
have the responsibility for or help with the company’s payroll and computer network.
In smaller corporations, an accountant may be responsible for or assist with several of these activities. In
larger firms, however, accountants may specialize in one of the areas of responsibilities and may rotate
responsibilities throughout their career. Many larger firms also use accountants as part of the internal audit
function. In addition, many large companies are able to dedicate resources to making the organization more
efficient. Programs such as Lean Manufacturing and Six Sigma focus on reducing waste and eliminating cost
within the organization. Accountants trained in these techniques receive specialized training that focuses on
the cost impact of the activities of the business.
As with many organizations, professional certifications are highly valued in corporations. The primary
certification for corporate accounting is the Certified Management Accountant (CMA). Because corporations
also undertake financial reporting and related activities, such as tax compliance, corporations often hire CPAs.

Governmental Entities
Accountants in governmental entities perform many of the same functions as accountants in public
accounting firms and corporations. The primary goal of governmental accounting is to ensure proper
tracking of the inflows and outflows of taxpayer funds using the proscribed standards. Some governmental
accountants also prepare and may also audit the work of other governmental agencies to ensure the funds
are properly accounted for. The major difference between accountants in governmental entities and
accountants working in public accounting firms and corporations relates to the specific rules by which the
financial reporting must be prepared. Whereas as accountants in public accounting firms and corporations use
GAAP, governmental accounting is prepared under a different set of rules that are specific to governmental
agencies, as previously referred to as the Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB). Students
continuing their study of accounting may take specific courses related to governmental accounting.
Accountants in the governmental sector may also work in specialized areas. For example, many accountants
work for tax agencies at the federal, state, and local levels to ensure the tax returns prepared by businesses
and individuals comply with the tax code appropriate for the particular jurisdiction. As another example,
accountants employed by the SEC may investigate instances where financial crimes occur, as in the case of
Bernie Madoff, which was discussed in Concepts in Practice: Financial Professionals and Fraud.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Bringing Down Capone
Al Capone was one of the most notorious criminals in American history. Born in 1899 in Brooklyn, New
York, Al Capone rose to fame as a gangster in Chicago during the era of Prohibition. By the late
1920s–1930s, Capone controlled a syndicate with a reported annual income of $100 million.
Al Capone was credited for many murders, including masterminding the famous 1929 St. Valentine’s Day
murder, which killed seven rival gang members. But law enforcement was unable to convict Capone for
the murders he committed or orchestrated. Through bribes and extortion, Capone was able to evade
severe punishment, being charged at one point with gun possession and serving a year in jail.
Capone’s luck ran out in 1931 when he was convicted of federal tax evasion. In 1927, the United States
Supreme Court ruled that earnings from illegal activities were taxable. Capone, however, did not claim
the illegal earnings on his 1928 and 1929 income tax returns and was subsequently sentenced to eleven
years in prison. Up to that point, it was the longest-ever sentence for tax evasion.
Al Capone was paroled from prison in November 1939 and died on January 25, 1947. His life has been the
subject of many articles, books, movies including Scarface (1932), and the TV series The Untouchables
(1993).
Those interested in stories like this might consider working for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
According to the FBI, as of 2012, approximately 15% of FBI agents are special agent accountants.

43

44

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Figure 1.11

Al Capone. The FBI’s 1932 criminal record on Al Capone shows the many charges against

him, most of which were dismissed. (credit: modification of “Capone’s criminal record in 1932” by FBI/
United States Bureau of Prisons/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Not-for-Profit Entities, Including Charities, Foundations, and Universities
Not-for-profit entities include charitable organizations, foundations, and universities. Unlike for-profit entities,
not-for-profit organizations have a primary focus of a particular mission. Therefore, not-for-profit (NFP)
accounting helps ensure that donor funds are used for the intended mission. Much like accountants in
governmental entities, accountants in not-for-profit entities use a slightly different type of accounting than
other types of businesses, with the primary difference being that not-for-profit entities typically do not pay
income taxes.
However, even if a not-for-profit organization is not subjected to income taxes in a particular year, it generally
must file informational returns, such as a Form 990, with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Information, such

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

45

as sources and amounts of funding and major types and amounts of expenditures, is documented by the notfor-profit entities to provide information for potential and current donors. Once filed with the IRS, Form 990 is
available for public view so that the public can monitor how the specific charity uses proceeds as well as its
operational efficiency.

Potential Certifications for Accountants
As previously discussed, the study of accounting serves as a foundation for other careers that are similar to
accounting, and the certifications described here reflect that relationship.
There are many benefits to attaining a professional certification (or multiple certifications) in addition to a
college degree. Certifications often cover material at a deeper and more complex level than might typically be
covered in a college program. Those earning a professional certification demonstrate their willingness to
invest the additional time and energy into becoming experts in the particular field. Because of this, employees
with professional certifications are often in higher demand and earn higher salaries than those without
professional certifications. Companies also benefit by having employees with professional certifications. A
well-trained staff with demonstrated expertise conveys a level of professionalism that gives the organization a
competitive advantage. In addition, professional certifications often require a certain number of hours of
ongoing training. This helps ensure that the certificate holder remains informed as to the current advances
within the profession and benefits both the employee and the employer.
Certifications are developed and governed by the respective governing body. Each issuing body establishes
areas of content and requirements for the specific certification. Links to the particular websites are provided
so you can easily gain additional information.
It is also important to note that many of the certifications have review courses available. The review courses
help students prepare for the exam by offering test-taking strategies, practice questions and exams, and other
materials that help students efficiently and effectively prepare for the exams.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Accounting Codes of Ethics
In the United States, accountants can obtain a number of different certifications and can be licensed by
each state to practice as a Certified Public Accountant (CPA). Accountants can also belong to professional
organizations that have their own codes of conduct. As the online Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
explains, “many people engaged in business activity, including accountants and lawyers, are
professionals. As such, they are bound by codes of conduct promulgated by professional societies. Many
firms also have detailed codes of conduct, developed and enforced by teams of ethics and compliance
personnel.”

[8]

CPAs can find a code of ethics in each state of practice and with the AICPA.

[9]

Certifications

such as the CMA, CIA, CFE, CFA, and CFP each have their own codes of ethics.
To facilitate cross-border business activities and accounting, an attempt has been made to set
international standards. To this end, accounting standards organizations in more than 100 countries use
the International Federation of Accountants’ (IFAC) Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants.”

[10]

46

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

When auditing a public company, CPAs may also have to follow a special code of ethics created by the
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), or when performing federal tax work, the US
Treasury Department’s Circular No. 230 code of ethics. These are just some examples of ethical codes
that are covered in more detail in this course. Each area of accounting work has its own set of ethical
rules, but they all require that a professional accountant perform his or her work with integrity.

Certified Public Accountant (CPA)
The Certified Public Accountant (CPA) designation is earned after passing a uniform exam issued by the
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). While the exam is a uniform, nationally
administered exam, each state issues and governs CPA licenses.
The CPA exam has four parts: Auditing and Attestation (AUD), Business Environment and Concepts (BEC),
Financial Accounting and Reporting (FAR), and Regulation (REG). A score of at least 75% must be earned in
order to earn the CPA designation.
Since each state determines the requirements for CPA licenses, students are encouraged to check the state
board of accountancy for specific requirements. In Ohio, for example, candidates for the CPA exam must have
150 hours of college credit. Of those, thirty semester hours (or equivalent quarter hours) must be in
accounting. Once the CPA designation is earned in Ohio, 120 hours of continuing education must be taken
over a three-year period in order to maintain the certification. The requirements for the Ohio CPA exam are
similar to the requirements for other states. Even though states issue CPA licenses, a CPA will not lose the
designation should he or she move to another state. Each state has mobility or reciprocity requirements that
allow CPAs to transfer licensure from one state to another. Reciprocity requirements can be obtained by
contacting the respective state board of accountancy.
The majority of states require 150 hours of college credit. Students often graduate with a bachelor’s degree
with approximately 120–130 credit hours. In order to reach the 150-hour requirement that specific states have,
students have a couple of options. The extra hours can be earned either by taking additional classes in their
undergraduate program or by entering a graduate program, earning a master’s degree. Master’s degrees that
would be most beneficial in an accounting or related field would be a master of accountancy, master in
taxation, or a master in analytics, which is rapidly increasing in demand.

LINK TO LEARNING
Information about the Certified Public Accountant (CPA) exam is provided by the following:
• the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) (https://openstax.org/l/50AICPA_CPA)
• the National Association of State Boards of Accountancy (NASBA) (https://openstax.org/l/

8 Jeffrey Moriarty. “Business Ethics.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. November 17, 2016. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ethicsbusiness/
9 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). “AICPA Code of Professional Conduct.” n.d. https://www.aicpa.org/research/
standards/codeofconduct.html
10 Catherine Allen and Robert Bunting. “A Global Standard for Professional Ethics: Cross-Border Business Concerns.” May 2008.
https://www.ifrs.com/overview/Accounting_Firms/Global_Standard.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

47

50NASBA_CPA)
• This Way to CPA (https://openstax.org/l/50ThisWayCPA)

Certified Management Accountant (CMA)
The Certified Management Accountant (CMA) exam is developed and administered by the Institute of
Management Accountants (IMA). There are many benefits in earning the CMA designation, including career
advancement and earnings potential. Management accountants, among other activities, prepare budgets,
perform analysis of financial and operational variances, and determine the cost of providing goods and
services. Earning a certification enables the management accountant to advance to management and
executive positions within the organization.
The CMA exam has two parts: Financial Reporting, Planning, Performance, and Control (part 1) and Financial
Decision-Making (part 2). A score of at least 72% must be earned in order to earn the CMA designation. A
minimum of a bachelor’s degree is required to take the CMA exam. An accounting degree or a specific number
of credit hours in accounting is not required in order to take the CMA exam. Once the CMA designation is
earned, thirty hours of continuing education with two of the hours focusing on ethics must be taken annually
in order to maintain the certification.

LINK TO LEARNING
Visit the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA)’s page on the Certified Management Accountant
(CMA) exam and certification (https://openstax.org/l/50CMAExamIMA) to learn more.

Certified Internal Auditor (CIA)
The Certified Internal Auditor (CIA) exam is developed and administered by the Institute of Internal Auditors
(IIA). According to the IIA website, the four-part CIA exam tests “candidates’ grasp of internal auditing’s role in
governance, risk, and control; conducting an audit engagement; business analysis and information
technology; and business management skills.”

[11]

If a candidate does not have a bachelor’s degree, eligibility to take the CIA is based on a combination of work
experience and education experience. In order to earn the CIA designation, a passing score of 80% is required.
After successful passage of the CIA exam, certificate holders are required to earn eighty hours of continuing
education credit every two years.

[12]

11 The Institute of Internal Auditors. “What Does It Take to Be a Professional?” n.d. https://na.theiia.org/about-ia/PublicDocuments/
WDIT_Professional-WEB.pdf
12 The Institute of Internal Auditors. “What Does It Take to Be a Professional?” n.d. https://na.theiia.org/about-ia/PublicDocuments/
WDIT_Professional-WEB.pdf

48

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

LINK TO LEARNING
Information about the Certified Internal Auditor (CIA) exam is provided by the following:
• the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA), Global (https://openstax.org/l/50IIAGlobeCIA)
• the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA), North America (https://openstax.org/l/50IIANorthAmCIA)

Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE)
The Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE) exam is developed and administered by the Association of Certified Fraud
Examiners (ACFE). Eligibility to take the CFE is based on a points system based on education and work
experience. Candidates with forty points may take the CFE exam, and official certification is earned with fifty
points or more. A bachelor’s degree, for example, is worth forty points toward eligibility of the fifty-point
requirement for the CFE certification. The CFE offers an attractive supplement for students interested in
pursuing a career in accounting fraud detection. Students might also consider studying forensic accounting in
college. These courses are often offered at the graduate level.
The CFE exam has four parts: Fraud Prevention and Deterrence, Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes,
Investigation, and Law. Candidates must earn a minimum score of 75%. Once the CFE is earned, certificate
holders must annually complete at least twenty hours of continuing education. The CFE certification is valued
in many organizations, including governmental agencies at the local, state, and federal levels.

LINK TO LEARNING
Visit the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE) page on the Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE)
exam (https://openstax.org/l/50ACFE_CFEexam) to learn more.

Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA)
The Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) certification is developed and administered by the CFA Institute. The CFA
exam contains three levels (level I, level II, and level III), testing expertise in Investment Tools, Asset Classes,
and Portfolio Management. Those with a bachelor’s degree are eligible to take the CFA exam. In lieu of a
bachelor’s degree, work experience or a combination of work experience and education is considered
satisfactory for eligibility to take the CFA exam. After taking the exam, candidates receive a “Pass” or “Did Not
Pass” result. A passing score is determined by the CFA Institute once the examination has been administered.
The passing score threshold is established after considering factors such as exam content and current best
practices. After successful passage of all three levels of the CFA examination, chartered members must earn at
least twenty hours annually of continuing education, of which two hours must be in Standards, Ethics, and
Regulations (SER).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

49

LINK TO LEARNING
Visit the the CFA Institute’s page on the Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) exam (https://openstax.org/l/
50CFA_CFAexam) to learn more.

Certified Financial Planner (CFP)
The Certified Financial Planner (CFP) certification is developed and administered by the Certified Financial
Planner (CFP) Board of Standards. The CFP exam consists of 170 multiple-choice questions that are taken over
two, three-hour sessions. There are several ways in which the eligibility requirements can be met in order to
take the CFP exam, which students can explore using the CFP Board of Standards website. As with the
Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) exam, the CFP Board of Standards does not predetermine a passing score
but establishes the pass/fail threshold through a deliberative evaluation process. Upon successful completion
of the exam, CFPs must obtain thirty hours of continuing education every two years, with two of the hours
focused on ethics.

LINK TO LEARNING
Visit the Certified Financial Planners (CFP) Board of Standards page on the the Certified Financial Planner
(CFP) exam (https://openstax.org/l/50CFP_CFPexam) to learn more.

50

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Key Terms
accounting process of organizing, analyzing, and communicating financial information that is used for
decision-making
auditing process of ensuring activities are carried out as intended or designed
consulting process of giving advice or guidance on financial and nonfinancial impact of a course of action
cost accounting recording and tracking of costs in the manufacturing process
creditor business that grants extended, but short-term, payment terms to other businesses
financial accounting measures the financial performance of an organization using standard conventions to
prepare financial reports
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) independent, nonprofit organization that sets financial
accounting and reporting standards for both public and private sector businesses in the United States
that use Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP)
for-profit business has the primary purpose of earning a profit by selling goods and services
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) common set of rules, standards, and procedures that
publicly traded companies must follow when composing their financial statements
governmental accounting process of tracking the inflows and outflows of taxpayer funds using prescribed
standards
Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) source of generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP) used by state and local governments in the United States; is a private nongovernmental
organization
governmental entity provides services to the general public (taxpayers)
lender bank or other institution that has the primary purpose of lending money
managerial accounting process that allows decision makers to set and evaluate business goals by
determining what information they need to make a particular decision and how to analyze and
communicate this information
manufacturing business for-profit business that is designed to make a specific product or products
nonprofit (not-for-profit) organization tax-exempt organization that serves its community in a variety of
areas
not-for-profit (NFP) accounting including charities, universities, and foundations, helps ensure that donor
funds are used for the intended mission of the not-for-profit entity
privately held company company whose stock is available only to employees or select individuals or groups
publicly traded company company whose stock is traded (bought and sold) on an organized stock
exchange
retail business for-profit business that purchases products (called inventory) and resells the products
without altering them
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) federal regulatory agency that regulates corporations with
shares listed and traded on security exchanges through required periodic filings
service business business that does not sell tangible products to customers but rather sells intangible
benefits (services) to customers; can be either a for-profit or a not-for-profit organization
stakeholder someone affected by decisions made by a company; may include an investor, creditor,
employee, manager, regulator, customer, supplier, and layperson
stockholder owner of stock, or shares, in a business
transaction business activity or event that has an effect on financial information presented on financial
statements

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

51

Summary
1.1 Explain the Importance of Accounting and Distinguish between Financial and Managerial
Accounting
• Accounting is the process of organizing, analyzing, and communicating financial information that is used
for decision-making.
• Accounting is often called the “language of business.”
• Financial accounting measures performance using financial reports and communicates results to those
outside of the organization who may have an interest in the company’s performance, such as investors
and creditors.
• Managerial accounting uses both financial and nonfinancial information to aid in decision-making.
1.2 Identify Users of Accounting Information and How They Apply Information
• The primary goal of accounting is to provide accurate, timely information to decision makers.
• Accountants provide information to internal and external users.
• Financial accounting measures an organization’s performance in monetary terms.
• Accountants use common conventions to prepare and convey financial information.
• Financial accounting is historical in nature, but a series of historical events can be useful in establishing
predictions.
• Financial accounting is intended for use by both internal and external users.
• Managerial accounting is primarily intended for internal users.
1.3 Describe Typical Accounting Activities and the Role Accountants Play in Identifying, Recording, and
Reporting Financial Activities
• Accountants play a vital role in many types of organizations.
• Organizations can be placed into three categories: for profit, governmental, and not for profit.
• For-profit organizations have a primary purpose of earning a profit.
• Governmental entities provide services to the general public, both individuals and organizations.
• Governmental agencies exist at the federal, state, and local levels.
• Not-for-profit entities have the primary purpose of serving a particular interest or need in communities.
• For-profit businesses can be further categorized into manufacturing, retail (or merchandising), and
service.
• Manufacturing businesses are for-profit businesses that are designed to make a specific product or
products.
• Retail firms purchase products and resell the products without altering the products.
• Service-oriented businesses provide services to customers.
1.4 Explain Why Accounting Is Important to Business Stakeholders
• Stakeholders are persons or groups that rely on financial information to make decisions.
• Stakeholders include stockholders, creditors, governmental and regulatory agencies, customers, and
managers and other employees.
• Stockholders are owners of a business.
• Publicly traded companies sell stock (ownership) to the general public.
• Privately held companies offer stock to employees or to select individuals or groups outside the
organization.
• Creditors sometimes grant extended payment terms to other businesses, normally for short periods of
time, such as thirty to forty-five days.

52

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

• Lenders are banks and other institutions that have a primary purpose of lending money for long periods
of time.
• Businesses generally have three ways to raise capital (money): profitable operations, selling ownership
(called equity financing), and borrowing from lenders (called debt financing).
• In business, profit means the inflows of resources are greater than the outflows of resources.
• Publicly traded companies are required to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), a
federal government agency charged with protecting the investing public.
• Guidelines for the accounting profession are called accounting standards or generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP).
• The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is responsible for establishing accounting standards for
companies whose stocks are traded publicly on a national or regional stock exchange, such as the New
York Stock Exchange (NYSE).
• Governmental and regulatory agencies at the federal, state, and local levels use financial information to
accomplish the mission of protecting the public interest.
• Customers, employees, and the local community benefit when businesses are financially successful.
1.5 Describe the Varied Career Paths Open to Individuals with an Accounting Education
• It is important for accountants to be well versed in written and verbal communication and possess other
nonaccounting skill sets.
• A bachelor’s degree is typically required for entry-level work in the accounting profession.
• Advanced degrees and/or professional certifications are beneficial for advancement within the
accounting profession.
• Career paths within the accounting profession include auditing, taxation, financial accounting, consulting,
accounting information systems, cost and managerial accounting, financial planning, and
entrepreneurship.
• Internal control systems help ensure the company’s goals are being met and company assets are
protected.
• Internal auditors work inside business and evaluate the effectiveness of internal control systems.
• Accountants help ensure the taxes are paid properly and in a timely manner.
• Accountants prepare financial statements that are used by decision makers inside and outside of the
organization.
• Accountants can advise managers and other decision makers.
• Accountants are often an integral part of managing a company’s computerized accounting and
information system.
• Cost accounting determines the costs involved with providing goods and services.
• Managerial accounting incorporates financial and nonfinancial information to make decisions for a
business.
• Training in accounting is helpful for financial planning services for businesses and individuals.
• Accounting helps entrepreneurs understand the financial implications of their business.
• Accountants have opportunities to work for many types of organizations, including public accounting
firms, corporations, governmental entities, and not-for-profit entities.
• Professional certifications offer many benefits to those in the accounting and related professions.
• Common professional certifications include Certified Public Accountant (CPA), Certified Management
Accountant (CMA), Certified Internal Auditor (CIA), Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE), Chartered Financial
Analyst (CFA), and Certified Financial Planner (CFP).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

Multiple Choice
1.

1.2 Accounting is sometimes called the “language of _____.”
A.

Wall Street

B.

business

C.

Main Street

D.

financial statements

2.

1.2 Financial accounting information ________.
A.

should be incomplete in order to confuse competitors

B.

should be prepared differently by each company

C.

provides investors guarantees about the future

D.

summarizes what has already occurred

3.

1.2 External users of financial accounting information include all of the following except ________.
A.

lenders such as bankers

B.

governmental agencies such as the IRS

C.

employees of a business

D.

potential investors

4.

1.2 Which of the following groups would have access to managerial accounting information?
A.

bankers

B.

investors

C.

competitors of the business

D.

managers

5.

1.2 All of the following are examples of managerial accounting activities except ________.
A.

preparing external financial statements in compliance with GAAP

B.

deciding whether or not to use automation

C.

making equipment repair or replacement decisions

D.

deciding whether or not to use automation

6.

1.3 Which of the following is not true?
A.

Organizations share a common purpose or mission.

B.

Organizations have inflows and outflows of resources.

C.

Organizations add value to society.

D.

Organizations need accounting information.

7.

1.3 The primary purpose of what type of business is to serve a particular need in the community?
A.

for-profit

B.

not-for-profit

C.

manufacturing

D.

retail

53

54

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

8.

1.3 Which of the following is not an example of a retailer?
A.

electronics store

B.

grocery store

C.

car dealership

D.

computer manufacturer

E.

jewelry store

9.

1.3 A governmental agency can best be described by which of the following statements?
A.

has a primary purpose of making a profit

B.

has a primary purpose of using taxpayer funds to provide services

C.

produces goods for sale to the public

D.

has regular shareholder meetings

10.

1.3 Which of the following is likely not a type of not-for-profit entity?
A.

public library

B.

community foundation

C.

university

D.

local movie theater

11.

1.4 Which of the following is not considered a stakeholder of an organization?
A.

creditors

B.

lenders

C.

employees

D.

community residents

E.

a business in another industry

12.

1.4 Stockholders can best be defined as which of the following?
A.

investors who lend money to a business for a short period of time

B.

investors who lend money to a business for a long period of time

C.

investors who purchase an ownership in the business

D.

analysts who rate the financial performance of the business

13.

1.4 Which of the following sell stock on an organized stock exchange such as the New York Stock

Exchange?
A.

publicly traded companies

B.

not-for-profit businesses

C.

governmental agencies

D.

privately held companies

E.

government-sponsored entities

14.

1.4 All of the following are sustainable methods businesses can use to raise capital (funding) except for

________.
A.

borrowing from lenders

B.

selling ownership shares

C.

profitable operations

D.

tax refunds

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

15.

1.4 The accounting information of a privately held company is generally available to all of the following

except for ________.
A.

governmental agencies

B.

investors

C.

creditors and lenders

D.

competitors

16.

1.5 Which of the following skills/attributes is not a primary skill for accountants to possess?
A.

written communication

B.

verbal communication

C.

ability to work independently

D.

analytical thinking

E.

extensive computer programing background

17.

1.5 Which of the following is typically required for entry-level positions in the accounting profession?
A.

bachelor’s degree

B.

master’s degree

C.

Certified Public Accountant (CPA)

D.

Certified Management Accountant (CMA)

E.

only a high school diploma

18.

1.5 Typical accounting tasks include all of the following tasks except ________.
A.

auditing

B.

recording and tracking costs

C.

tax compliance and planning

D.

consulting

E.

purchasing direct materials

19.

1.5 What type of organization primarily offers tax compliance, auditing, and consulting services?
A.

corporations

B.

public accounting firms

C.

governmental entities

D.

universities

20.

1.5 Most states require 150 semester hours of college credit for which professional certification?
A.

Certified Management Accountant (CMA)

B.

Certified Internal Auditor (CIA)

C.

Certified Public Accountant (CPA)

D.

Certified Financial Planner (CFP)

Questions
1.

55

1.2 Research your top five career choices. Identify financial factors that might influence your career

choice. The following websites might be helpful in answering this question.
• Occupational Outlook Handbook: https://www.bls.gov/ooh/
• National Association of Colleges and Employers: http://www.naceweb.org/
• O*Net OnLine: https://www.onetonline.org/find/

56

2.

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

1.2 Using the same top five career choices, identify nonfinancial factors that might influence your career

choice. The following websites might be helpful in answering this question.
• Occupational Outlook Handbook: https://www.bls.gov/ooh/
• National Association of Colleges and Employers: http://www.naceweb.org/
• O*Net OnLine: https://www.onetonline.org/find/
3.

1.2 Think about a recent purchase you made. Describe what financial and nonfinancial factors went into

that purchase. Rank the factors, and explain how you made the final decision to purchase the item.
4.

1.2 Computerized accounting systems help businesses efficiently record and utilize financial information.

QuickBooks is a popular software package for small businesses. Explore the QuickBooks website at
https://quickbooks.intuit.com/. Select one of the QuickBooks plans, and discuss some of the capabilities of the
software. Taking the perspective of a small business owner, explain how this software might help the
business.
5.

1.2 The following information was taken from the Netflix financial statements.

For Netflix, sales is the product of the number of subscribers and the price charged for each subscription.
What observations can you make about the previous three years of Netflix’s sales? Given this data, provide any
predictions you can make about the future financial performance of Netflix. What nonfinancial factors
influenced that prediction?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

6.

57

1.2 The following chart shows the price of Netflix stock for the six-month period from August 2017 to

January 2018.

Assume you are considering purchasing Netflix stock. What considerations would influence your decision?
Relative to Netflix’s financial performance, what factors would influence the decision, and how would those
factors rank in your decision? What about the nonfinancial factors?
7.

1.3 Use the internet to research one for-profit, one governmental, and one not-for-profit entity. For each

entity, describe the following:
A.

the primary purpose of the entity

B.

the types of activities that accountants would record (hint: what is the source of the entity’s funding,
and what costs might the entity have?)

C.

the types of decisions that might be made in this organization and how financial and nonfinancial
information might help the decision-making process

8.

1.3 Use the internet to research one manufacturing, one retail (or merchandising), and one service

business. For each business, describe the following:
A.

the primary purpose of the entity

B.

the types of activities that accountants would record (hint: what is the source of the business’ funding,
and what costs might the business have?)

C.

the types of decisions that might be made in this organization and how financial and nonfinancial
information might help the decision-making process

9.

1.3 Assume you are considering opening a retail business. You are trying to decide whether to have a

traditional “brick-and-mortar” store or to sell only online. Explain how the activities and costs differ between
these two retail arrangements.

58

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

10.

1.3 Uber and Lyft are two popular ride-sharing services. Imagine that you are visiting New York City for

a family vacation. You are trying to decide whether to use one of these ride-sharing services to get around the
city or rent a car and drive yourself. Considering the perspectives of the passengers (your family), the drivers,
and the company (Uber or Lyft), explain the following:
A.

why ride-sharing services have gained in popularity

B.

the financial considerations relevant to your decision

C.

the nonfinancial considerations relevant to your decision

11.

1.3 How would you categorize or classify a company like Disney?

12.

1.3 Charity Navigator (https://www.charitynavigator.org) is a website dedicated to providing

information regarding not-for-profit charitable organizations.
A.

After reviewing the website, explain how not-for-profit organizations are rated.

B.

Explain why there is a need for the type of information provided by Charity Navigator.

C.

Choose one to two charities listed in the website. Explain the information provided about the charity
(financial and nonfinancial), the rating of the charity, and any other relevant factors.

13.

1.4 Use the internet to visit the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) website

(https://www.sec.gov/). Write a report discussing the following:
A.

several of the services provided by the SEC

B.

why the services are important to the investing public

C.

why you think the SEC would require publicly traded companies to file financial information

14.

1.4 Imagine that you have just been elected president of your university’s student senate. Assume the

university is considering constructing a new student union—a place that offers a variety of stores, restaurants,
and entertainment option for students—and has asked the student senate to develop a formal position in
support or opposition of the new student union.
A.

Identify the stakeholders involved in this decision. Discuss the relevant considerations that each
stakeholder might have.

B.

Discuss the financial information that might be helpful in formulating the student senate position.

C.

Discuss the nonfinancial information that might be helpful in formulating the student senate position.

15.

1.4 According to a company press release, on January 5, 2012, Hansen Natural Corporation changed its

name to Monster Beverage Corporation. According to Yahoo Finance, on that day the value of the company
stock (symbol: MNST) was $15.64 per share. On January 5, 2018, the stock closed at $63.49 per share. This
represents an increase of nearly 306%.
A.

Discuss the factors that might influence the increase in share price.

B.

Consider yourself as a potential shareholder. What factors would you consider when deciding whether
or not to purchase shares in Monster Beverage Corporation today?

16.

1.4 The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) is often cited as a key metric for business activity. The

average is a mathematical formula that uses the stock prices of thirty companies traded on the New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE) and the National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation (NASDAQ) system.
A.

Identify several of the companies that are included in the DJIA.

B.

Explain why this metric might be commonly used to measure business activity.

C.

Research the history of the DJIA and note some interesting facts. When did the Dow begin? What was
the first value? What was the lowest value? The following is an example of a website that may be
helpful: http://www.dow-jones-djia.com/history-of-dow-jones-industrial-average-index/.

D.

What is the current value of the DJIA? What factors might contribute to the difference between early
and current values of the DJIA?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

17.

59

1.5 Many professional certifications now have requirements for ethics training.
A.

Define ethics.

B.

Why does the accounting profession put so much emphasis on acting ethically?

18.

1.5 The Certified Public Accountant (CPA) exam is a uniform exam that is administered by a national

organization. Licenses, however, are issued by individual states.
A.

Explain why you think each state is responsible for issuing CPA licenses.

B.

Choose two to three states, and compare and contrast the requirements to become a CPA. Are they
fairly consistent or drastically different from each other? A helpful resource is
https://www.thiswaytocpa.com/. You may also find it helpful to search the board of accountancy for
each state.

C.

Tax preparation is a large part of what many CPAs do. Students may be interested to know that a CPA
(or any other licensing) is not required to prepare tax returns. Assume you know two friends who
prepare tax returns for others, one is a CPA and one is not. Assume that both friends intend to move
next year and will, therefore, prepare taxes in another state. Analyze this situation.

19.

1.5 Accounting is not the only profession to offer professional certifications. Many other professions

have certifications that are either required or encouraged for entry or advancement in the profession. Think of
two to three career paths that you have considered or are considering. After doing some research, complete
the following:
A.

Identify the name of the certification and the institute that administered the certification.

B.

Explain the education and/or experience requirements for taking the exam and earning the license.

C.

Discuss any of the benefits, financial or otherwise, of earning the certification.

20.

1.5 Assume you are considering earning a master’s degree (or even doctorate) after earning your

bachelor’s degree. One option is to continue directly into a master’s program and then enter the workforce.
Another option is to gain some work experience and then return to graduate school and earn your master’s
degree.
A.

Evaluate these options, and identify the advantages and disadvantages of each.

B.

It may be helpful to do some research on earnings and advancement potential, available formats of
graduate programs (full time, part time, online), and other factors that might influence your decision.
You may want to research graduate programs and utilize sites such as the Occupational Outlook
Handbook (https://www.bls.gov/ooh/).

60

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 1 Role of Accounting in Society

2

Introduction to Financial Statements
Figure 2.1 Derek’s Venture. Technology can be a great tool for those who are far away from friends and
family. Tablets are one way for those unfamiliar with technology to become comfortable using technology to
connect with others. (credit: modification of “Lady Elderly” by “MabelAmber”/Pixabay, CC0)

Chapter Outline
2.1 Describe the Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, Balance Sheet, and Statement of Cash
Flows, and How They Interrelate
2.2 Define, Explain, and Provide Examples of Current and Noncurrent Assets, Current and Noncurrent
Liabilities, Equity, Revenues, and Expenses
2.3 Prepare an Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, and Balance Sheet

Why It Matters
As a teenager, Derek loves computers. He also enjoys giving back to the community by helping others. Derek
understands that many senior citizens live far away from their families, resulting in infrequent visits and
loneliness. This summer he is considering combining both things he enjoys by working with the local
retirement center. His idea is to have workshops to show the senior citizens how to connect with their families
through the use of technology. The director of the retirement center is enthused about Derek’s idea and has
agreed to pay him for the services. During his visits, he will set up tablets and then show the seniors how to
use them. Since he lives nearby, he will also provide support on an as-needed basis.
While he is excited about this opportunity, he is also trying to save up money for college. Although the
retirement center will pay him for the workshops, he knows the investment in providing tablets will be
expensive, and he wants to ensure he can cover his costs. A neighbor who works in banking suggests that
Derek get a small loan to cover the costs of the tablets and use the income he earns to repay the loan. Derek is
excited by the idea but is anxious when his neighbor mentions he will have to provide the bank monthly
financial information, such as checking account and other financial statements. While he enjoys technology

62

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

and helping others, he is unfamiliar with financial statements. Derek decides to learn more about how
financial statements will help both him and the bank make sound financial decisions.
2.1

Describe the Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, Balance

Sheet, and Statement of Cash Flows, and How They Interrelate
The study of accounting requires an understanding of precise and sometimes complicated terminology,
purposes, principles, concepts, and organizational and legal structures. Typically, your introductory accounting
courses will familiarize you with the overall accounting environment, and for those of you who want greater
detail, there is an assortment of more advanced accounting courses available.
This chapter concentrates on the four major types of financial statements and their interactions, the major
types of business structures, and some of the major terms and concepts used in this course. Coverage here is
somewhat basic since these topics are accorded much greater detail in future chapters.

Types of Business Structure
As you learned in Role of Accounting in Society, virtually every activity that occurs in a business has an
associated cost or value. Part of an accountant’s role is to quantify these activities, or transactions.
Also, in business—and accounting in particular—it is necessary to distinguish the business entity from the
individual owner(s). The personal transactions of the owners, employees, and other parties connected to the
business should not be recorded in the organization’s records; this accounting principle is called the business
entity concept. Accountants should record only business transactions in business records.
This separation is also reflected in the legal structure of the business. There are several common types of legal
business structures. While the accounting concepts for the various types of businesses are essentially the
same regardless of the legal structure, the terminology will change slightly depending on the organization’s
legal structure, and it is important to understand the differences.
There are three broad categories for the legal structure of an organization: sole proprietorship, partnership,
and corporation. A sole proprietorship is a legal business structure consisting of a single individual. Benefits
of this type of structure include ease of formation, favorable tax treatment, and a high level of control over the
business. The risks involved with sole proprietorships include unlimited personal liability and a limited life for
the business. Unless the business is sold, the business ends when the owner retires or passes away. In
addition, sole proprietorships have a fairly limited ability to raise capital (funding), and often sole proprietors
have limited expertise—they are excellent at what they do but may have limited expertise in other important
areas of business, such as accounting or marketing.
A partnership is a legal business structure consisting of an association of two or more people who contribute
money, property, or services to operate as co-owners of a business. Benefits of this type of structure include
favorable tax treatment, ease of formation of the business, and better access to capital and expertise. The
downsides to a partnership include unlimited personal liability (although there are other legal structures—a
limited liability partnership, for example—to help mitigate the risk); limited life of the partnership, similar to
sole proprietorships; and increased complexity to form the venture (decision-making authority, profit-sharing
arrangement, and other important issues need to be formally articulated in a written partnership agreement).
A corporation is a legal business structure involving one or more individuals (owners) who are legally distinct
(separate) from the business. A primary benefit of a corporate legal structure is the owners of the organization

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

63

have limited liability. That is, a corporation is “stand alone,” conducting business as an entity separate from its
owners. Under the corporate structure, owners delegate to others (called agents) the responsibility to make
day-to-day decisions regarding the operations of the business. Other benefits of the corporate legal structure
include relatively easy access to large amounts of capital by obtaining loans or selling ownership (stock), and
since the stock is easily sold or transferred to others, the business operates beyond the life of the
shareholders. A major disadvantage of a corporate legal structure is double taxation—the business pays
income tax and the owners are taxed when distributions (also called dividends) are received.
Types of Business Structures
Sole Proprietorship

Partnership

Corporation

Number of Owners

Single individual

Two or more individuals

One or more owners

Ease of Formation

Easier to form

Harder to form

Difficult to form

Ability to Raise Capital

Difficult to raise capital

Harder to raise capital

Easier to raise capital

Liability Risk

Unlimited liability

Unlimited liability

Limited liability

Taxation Consideration

Single taxation

Single taxation

Double taxation

Table 2.1

The Four Financial Statements
Are you a fan of books, movies, or sports? If so, chances are you have heard or said the phrase “spoiler alert.”
It is used to forewarn readers, viewers, or fans that the ending of a movie or book or outcome of a game is
about to be revealed. Some people prefer knowing the end and skipping all of the details in the middle, while
others prefer to fully immerse themselves and then discover the outcome. People often do not know or
understand what accountants produce or provide. That is, they are not familiar with the “ending” of the
accounting process, but that is the best place to begin the study of accounting.
Accountants create what are known as financial statements. Financial statements are reports that
communicate the financial performance and financial position of the organization.
In essence, the overall purpose of financial statements is to evaluate the performance of a company,
governmental entity, or not-for-profit entity. This chapter illustrates this through a company, which is
considered to be in business to generate a profit. Each financial statement we examine has a unique function,
and together they provide information to determine whether a company generated a profit or loss for a given
period (such as a month, quarter, or year); the assets, which are resources of the company, and accompanying
liabilities, which are obligations of the company, that are used to generate the profit or loss; owner interest in
profits or losses; and the cash position of the company at the end of the period.
The four financial statements that perform these functions and the order in which we prepare them are:
1. Income Statement
2. Statement of Owner’s Equity
3. Balance Sheet

64

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

4. Statement of Cash Flows.
The order of preparation is important as it relates to the concept of how financial statements are interrelated.
Before explaining each in detail, let’s explore the purpose of each financial statement and its main
components.

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Introduction to the Gearhead Outfitters Story
Gearhead Outfitters, founded by Ted Herget in 1997 in Jonesboro, Arkansas, is a retail chain that sells
outdoor gear for men, women, and children. The company’s inventory includes clothing, footwear for
hiking and running, camping gear, backpacks, and accessories, by brands such as The North Face,
Birkenstock, Wolverine, Yeti, Altra, Mizuno, and Patagonia. Herget fell in love with the outdoor lifestyle
while working as a ski instructor in Colorado and wanted to bring that feeling back home to Arkansas.
And so, Gearhead was born in a small downtown location in Jonesboro. The company has had great
success over the years, expanding to numerous locations in Herget’s home state, as well as Louisiana,
Oklahoma, and Missouri.
While Herget knew his industry when starting Gearhead, like many entrepreneurs he faced regulatory
and financial issues that were new to him. Several of these issues were related to accounting and the
wealth of decision-making information that accounting systems provide.
For example, measuring revenue and expenses, providing information about cash flow to potential
lenders, analyzing whether profit and positive cash flow is sustainable to allow for expansion, and
managing inventory levels. Accounting, or the preparation of financial statements (balance sheet,
income statement, and statement of cash flows), provides the mechanism for business owners such as
Herget to make fundamentally sound business decisions.

Purpose of Financial Statements
Before exploring the specific financial statements, it is important to know why these are important documents.
To understand this, you must first understand who the users of financial statements are. Users of the
information found in financial statements are called stakeholders. A stakeholder is someone affected by
decisions made by a company; this can include groups or individuals affected by the actions or policies of an
organization, including include investors, creditors, employees, managers, regulators, customers, and
suppliers. The stakeholder’s interest sometimes is not directly related to the entity’s financial performance.
Examples of stakeholders include lenders, investors/owners, vendors, employees and management,
governmental agencies, and the communities in which the businesses operate. Stakeholders are interested in
the performance of an organization for various reasons, but the common goal of using the financial
statements is to understand the information each contains that is useful for making financial decisions. For
example, a banker may be interested in the financial statements to decide whether or not to lend the
organization money.
Likewise, small business owners may make decisions based on their familiarity with the business—they know if
the business is doing well or not based on their “gut feeling.” By preparing the financial statements,

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

65

accountants can help owners by providing clarity of the organization’s financial performance. It is important to
understand that, in the long term, every activity of the business has a financial impact, and financial
statements are a way that accountants report the activities of the business. Stakeholders must make many
decisions, and the financial statements provide information that is helpful in the decision-making process.
As described in Role of Accounting in Society, the complete set of financial statements acts as an X-ray of a
company’s financial health. By evaluating all of the financial statements together, someone with financial
knowledge can determine the overall health of a company. The accountant can use this information to advise
outside (and inside) stakeholders on decisions, and management can use this information as one tool to make
strategic short- and long-term decisions.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Utilitarian View of Accounting Decisions and Stakeholder Well-Being
Utilitarianism is a well-known and influential moral theory commonly used as a framework to evaluate
business decisions. Utilitarianism suggests that an ethical action is one whose consequence achieves the
greatest good for the greatest number of people. So, if we want to make an ethical decision, we should
ask ourselves who is helped and who is harmed by it. Focusing on consequences in this way generally
does not require us to take into account the means of achieving that particular end, however. Put simply,
the utilitarian view is an ethical theory that the best action of a company is the one that maximizes utility
of all stakeholders to the decision. This view assumes that all individuals with an interest in the business
are considered within the decision.
Financial statements are used to understand the financial performance of companies and to make longand short-term decisions. A utilitarian approach considers all stakeholders, and both the long- and shortterm effects of a business decision. This allows corporate decision makers to choose business actions
with the potential to produce the best outcomes for the majority of all stakeholders, not just
shareholders, and therefore maximize stakeholder happiness.
Accounting decisions can change the approach a stakeholder has in relation to a business. If a company
focuses on modifying operations and financial reporting to maximize short-term shareholder value, this
could indicate the prioritization of certain stakeholder interests above others. When a company pursues
only short-term profit for shareholders, it neglects the well-being of other stakeholders. Professional
accountants should be aware of the interdependent relationship between all stakeholders and consider
whether the results of their decisions are good for the majority of stakeholder interests.

YOUR TURN
Business Owners as Decision Makers
Think of a business owner in your family or community. Schedule some time to talk with the business
owner, and find out how he or she uses financial information to make decisions.
Solution

66

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Business owners will use financial information for many decisions, such as comparing sales from one
period to another, determining trends in costs and other expenses, and identifying areas in which to
reduce or reallocate expenses. This information will be used to determine, for example, staffing and
inventory levels, streamlining of operations, and advertising or other investment decisions.

The Income Statement
The first financial statement prepared is the income statement, a statement that shows the organization’s
financial performance for a given period of time. Let’s illustrate the purpose of an income statement using a
real-life example. Assume your friend, Chris, who is a sole proprietor, started a summer landscaping business
on August 1, 2020. It is categorized as a service entity. To keep this example simple, assume that she is using
her family’s tractor, and we are using the cash basis method of accounting to demonstrate Chris’s initial
operations for her business. The other available basis method that is commonly used in accounting is the
accrual basis method. She is responsible for paying for fuel and any maintenance costs. She named the
business Chris’ Landscaping. On August 31, Chris checked the account balance and noticed there is only $250
in the checking account. This balance is lower than expected because she thought she had been paid by some
customers. Chris decides to do some research to determine why the balance in the checking account is lower
than expected. Her research shows that she earned a total of $1,400 from her customers but had to pay $100
to fix the brakes on her tractor, $50 for fuel, and also made a $1,000 payment to the insurance company for
business insurance. The reason for the lower-than-expected balance was due to the fact that she spent ($1,150
for brakes, fuel, and insurance) only slightly less than she earned ($1,400)—a net increase of $250. While she
would like the checking balance to grow each month, she realizes most of the August expenses were
infrequent (brakes and insurance) and the insurance, in particular, was an unusually large expense. She is
convinced the checking account balance will likely grow more in September because she will earn money from
some new customers; she also anticipates having fewer expenses.

The Income Statement can also be visualized by the formula: Revenue – Expenses = Net Income/(Loss).
Let’s change this example slightly and assume the $1,000 payment to the insurance company will be paid in
September, rather than in August. In this case, the ending balance in Chris’s checking account would be
$1,250, a result of earning $1,400 and only spending $100 for the brakes on her car and $50 for fuel. This
stream of cash flows is an example of cash basis accounting because it reflects when payments are received

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

67

and made, not necessarily the time period that they affect. At the end of this section and in The Adjustment
Process you will address accrual accounting, which does reflect the time period that they affect.
In accounting, this example illustrates an income statement, a financial statement that is used to measure the
financial performance of an organization for a particular period of time. We use the simple landscaping
account example to discuss the elements of the income statement, which are revenues, expenses, gains, and
losses. Together, these determine whether the organization has net income (where revenues and gains are
greater than expenses and losses) or net loss (where expenses and losses are greater than revenues and
gains). Revenues, expenses, gains, and losses are further defined here.

Revenue
Revenue

[1]

is the value of goods and services the organization sold or provided to customers for a given

period of time. In our current example, Chris’s landscaping business, the “revenue” earned for the month of
August would be $1,400. It is the value Chris received in exchange for the services provided to her clients.
Likewise, when a business provides goods or services to customers for cash at the time of the service or in the
future, the business classifies the amount(s) as revenue. Just as the $1,400 earned from a business made
Chris’s checking account balance increase, revenues increase the value of a business. In accounting, revenues
are often also called sales or fees earned. Just as earning wages from a business or summer job reflects the
number of hours worked for a given rate of pay or payments from clients for services rendered, revenues (and
the other terms) are used to indicate the dollar value of goods and services provided to customers for a given
period of time.

YOUR TURN
Coffee Shop Products
Think about the coffee shop in your area. Identify items the coffee shop sells that would be classified as
revenues. Remember, revenues for the coffee shop are related to its primary purpose: selling coffee and
related items. Or, better yet, make a trip to the local coffee shop and get a first-hand experience.
Solution
Many coffee shops earn revenue through multiple revenue streams, including coffee and other specialty
drinks, food items, gift cards, and merchandise.

Expenses
An expense

[2]

is a cost associated with providing goods or services to customers. In our opening example, the

expenses that Chris incurred totaled $1,150 (consisting of $100 for brakes, $50 for fuel, and $1,000 for

1 In a subsequent section of this chapter, you will learn that the accounting profession is governed by the Financial Accounting Standards
Board (or FASB), a professional body that issues guidelines/pronouncements for the accounting profession. A set of theoretical
pronouncements issued by FASB is called Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts (SFAC). In SFAC No. 6, FASB defines revenues as “inflows
or other enhancements of assets of an entity or settlements of its liabilities (or a combination of both) from delivering or producing goods,
rendering services, or other activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major or central operations” (SFAC No. 6, p. 23).
2 Expenses are formally defined by the FASB as “outflows or other using up of assets or incurrences of liabilities (or a combination of both)
from delivering or producing goods, rendering services, or carrying out other activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major or central
operations” (SFAC No. 6, p. 23).

68

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

insurance). You might think of expenses as the opposite of revenue in that expenses reduce Chris’s checking
account balance. Likewise, expenses decrease the value of the business and represent the dollar value of costs
incurred to provide goods and services to customers for a given period of time.

YOUR TURN
Coffee Shop Expenses
While thinking about or visiting the coffee shop in your area, look around (or visualize) and identify items
or activities that are the expenses of the coffee shop. Remember, expenses for the coffee shop are
related to resources consumed while generating revenue from selling coffee and related items. Do not
forget about any expenses that might not be so obvious—as a general rule, every activity in a business
has an associated cost.
Solution
Costs of the coffee shop that might be readily observed would include rent; wages for the employees;
and the cost of the coffee, pastries, and other items/merchandise that may be sold. In addition, costs
such as utilities, equipment, and cleaning or other supplies might also be readily observable. More
obscure costs of the coffee shop would include insurance, regulatory costs such as health department
licensing, point-of-sale/credit card costs, advertising, donations, and payroll costs such as workers’
compensation, unemployment, and so on.

Gains
A gain

[3]

can result from selling ancillary business items for more than the items are worth. (Ancillary business

items are those that are used to support business operations.) To illustrate the concept of a gain, let’s return
to our example. However, this example and the accompanying losses example are not going to be part of our
income statement, balance sheet, or owner’s equity statement discussions. The gains and losses examples are
only to be used in demonstrating the concepts of gains and losses. Assume that Chris paid $1,500 for a small
piece of property to use for building a storage facility for her company. Further assume that Chris has an
opportunity to sell the land for $2,000. She subsequently found a better storage option and decided to sell the
property. After doing so, Chris will have a gain of $500 (a selling price of $2,000 and a cost of $1,500) and will
also have $2,000 to deposit into her checking account, which would increase the balance.
Thinking back to the proceeds ($1,400) Chris received from her landscaping business, we might ask the
question: how are gains similar to and different from revenues? The revenue of $1,400 that Chris earned from
her business and the $2,000 she received from selling the land are similar in that both increase her checking
account balance and make her business more valuable.
A difference, however, is evident if we consider how these funds were earned. Chris earned the $1,400 because
she provided services (her labor) to her clients. Chris’s primary objective is to earn revenue by working for her
clients. In addition, earning money by selling her land was an infrequent event for Chris, since her primary job
was serving as a landscaper. Her primary goal is to earn fees or revenue, not to earn money by selling land. In

3 FASB notes that gains represent an increase in organizational value from activities that are “incidental or peripheral” (SFAC No. 6, p. 24) to
the primary purpose of the business.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

69

fact, she cannot consider doing that again because she does not have additional land to sell.
The primary goal of a business is to earn revenue by providing goods and services to customers in exchange
for cash at that time or in the future. While selling other items for more than the value of the item does occur
in business, these transactions are classified as gains, because these sales are infrequent and not the primary
purpose of the business.

Losses
A loss

[4]

results from selling ancillary business items for less than the items are worth. To illustrate, let’s now

assume that Chris sells her land that she purchased for $1,500 at a sales price of $1,200. In this case she would
realize (incur) a loss of $300 on the sale of the property ($1,200 sales price minus the $1,500 cost of purchasing
the property) and will also have $1,200 to deposit into her checking account, which would increase the
balance.
You should not be confused by the fact that the checking account balance increased even though this
transaction resulted in a financial loss. Chris received $1,200 that she can deposit into her checking account
and use for future expenses. The $300 loss simply indicates that she received less for the land than she paid
for it. These are two aspects of the same transaction that communicate different things, and it is important to
understand the differences.
As we saw when comparing gains and revenues, losses are similar to expenses in that both losses and
expenses decrease the value of the organization. In addition, just as Chris’s primary goal is to earn money
from her job rather than selling land, in business, losses refer to infrequent transactions involving ancillary
items of the business.

Net Income (Net Loss)
Net income (net loss) is determined by comparing revenues and expenses. Net income is a result of revenues
(inflows) being greater than expenses (outflows). A net loss occurs when expenses (outflows) are greater than
revenues (inflows). In accounting it is common to present net income in the following format:

Recall that revenue is the value of goods and services a business provides to its customers and increase the
value of the business. Expenses, on the other hand, are the costs of providing the goods and services and
decrease the value of the business. When revenues exceed expenses, companies have net income. This means
the business has been successful at earning revenues, containing expenses, or a combination of both. If, on
the other hand, expenses exceed revenues, companies experience a net loss. This means the business was
unsuccessful in earning adequate revenues, sufficiently containing expenses, or a combination of both. While
businesses work hard to avoid net loss situations, it is not uncommon for a company to sustain a net loss from
time-to-time. It is difficult, however, for businesses to remain viable while experiencing net losses over the
long term.
Shown as a formula, the net income (loss) function is:

4 FASB notes losses represent a decrease in organizational value from activities that are “incidental or peripheral” (SFAC No. 6, p. 24) to the
primary purpose of the business.

70

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

To be complete, we must also consider the impact of gains and losses. While gains and losses are infrequent in
a business, it is not uncommon that a business would present a gain and/or loss in its financial statements.
Recall that gains are similar to revenue and losses are similar to expenses. Therefore, the traditional
accounting format would be:

Shown as a formula, the net income (loss) function, including gains and losses, is:

When assessing a company’s net income, it is important to understand the source of the net income.
Businesses strive to attain “high-quality” net income (earnings). High-quality earnings are based on
sustainable earnings—also called permanent earnings—while relying less on infrequent earnings—also called
temporary earnings. Recall that revenues represent the ongoing value of goods and services the business
provides (sells) to its customers, while gains are infrequent and involve items ancillary to the primary purpose
of the business. We should use caution if a business attains a significant portion of its net income as a result of
gains, rather than revenues. Likewise, net losses derived as a result of losses should be put into the proper
perspective due to the infrequent nature of losses. While net losses are undesirable for any reason, net losses
that result from expenses related to ongoing operations, rather than losses that are infrequent, are more
concerning for the business.

Statement of Owner’s Equity
Equity is a term that is often confusing but is a concept with which you are probably already familiar. In short,
equity is the value of an item that remains after considering what is owed for that item. The following example
may help illustrate the concept of equity.
When thinking about the concept of equity, it is often helpful to think about an example many families are
familiar with: purchasing a home. Suppose a family purchases a home worth $200,000. After making a down
payment of $25,000, they secure a bank loan to pay the remaining $175,000. What is the value of the family’s
equity in the home? If you answered $25,000, you are correct. At the time of the purchase, the family owns a
home worth $200,000 (an asset), but they owe $175,000 (a liability), so the equity or net worth in the home is
$25,000.
The statement of owner’s equity, which is the second financial statement created by accountants, is a
statement that shows how the equity (or value) of the organization has changed over time. Similar to the
income statement, the statement of owner’s equity is for a specific period of time, typically one year. Recall that
another way to think about equity is net worth, or value. So, the statement of owner’s equity is a financial

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

71

statement that shows how the net worth, or value, of the business has changed for a given period of time.

The elements of the financial statements shown on the statement of owner’s equity include investments by
owners as well as distributions to owners. Investments by owners and distributions to owners are two activities
that impact the value of the organization (increase and decrease, respectively). In addition, net income or net
loss affects the value of the organization (net income increases the value of the organization, and net loss
decreases it). Net income (or net loss) is also shown on the statement of owner’s equity; this is an example of
how the statements are interrelated. Note that the word owner’s (singular for a sole owner) changes to owners’
(plural, for a group of owners) when preparing this statement for an entity with multiple owners versus a sole
proprietorship.
In our example, to make it less complicated, we started with the first month of operations for Chris’s
Landscaping. In the first month of operations, the owner’s equity total begins the month of August 2020, at $0,
since there have been no transactions. During the month, the business received revenue of $1,400 and
incurred expenses of $1,150, for net income of $250. Since Chris did not contribute any investment or make
any withdrawals, other than the $1,150 for expenses, the ending balance in the owner’s equity account on
August 31, 2020, would be $250, the net income earned.
At this stage, it’s important to point out that we are working with a sole proprietorship to help simplify the
examples. We have addressed the owner’s value in the firm as capital or owner’s equity. However, later we
switch the structure of the business to a corporation, and instead of owner’s equity we begin using
stockholder’s equity, which includes account titles such as common stock and retained earnings to represent the
owners’ interests.
The corporate treatment is more complicated because corporations may have a few owners up to potentially
thousands of owners (stockholders). More detail on this issue is provided in Define, Explain, and Provide
Examples of Current and Noncurrent Assets, Current and Noncurrent Liabilities, Equity, Revenues, and
Expenses.

Investments by Owners
Generally, there are two ways by which organizations become more valuable: profitable operations (when
revenues exceed expenses) and investments by owners. Organizations often have long-term goals or projects
that are very expensive (for example, building a new manufacturing facility or purchasing another company).
While having profitable operations is a viable way to “fund” these goals and projects, organizations often want
to undertake these projects in a quicker time frame. Selling ownership is one way to quickly obtain the funding
necessary for these goals. Investments by owners represent an exchange of cash or other assets for which
the investor is given an ownership interest in the organization. This is a mutually beneficial arrangement: the
organization gets the funding it needs on a timely basis, and the investor gets an ownership interest in the
organization.

72

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

When organizations generate funding by selling ownership, the ownership interest usually takes the form of
common stock, which is the corporation’s primary class of stock issued, with each share representing a partial
claim to ownership or a share of the company’s business. When the organization issues common stock for the
first time, it is called an initial public offering (IPO). In Corporation Accounting, you learn more about the
specifics of this type of accounting. Once a company issues (or sells) common stock after an IPO, we describe
the company as a publicly traded company, which simply means the company’s stock can be purchased by
the general public on a public exchange like the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). That is, investors can
become owners of the particular company. Companies that issue publicly traded common shares in the United
States are regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), a federal regulatory agency that,
among other responsibilities, is charged with oversight of financial investments such as common stock.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Roku Goes Public
On September 1, 2017, Roku, Inc. filed a Form S-1 with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).

[5]

In this form, Roku disclosed its intention to become a publicly traded company, meaning its stock will
trade (sell) on public stock exchanges, allowing individual and institutional investors an opportunity to
own a portion (shares) of the company. The Form S-1 included detailed financial and nonfinancial
information about the company. The information from Roku also included the purpose of the offering as
well as the intended uses of the funds. Here is a portion of the disclosure: “The principal purposes of this
offering are to increase our capitalization and financial flexibility and create a public market for our Class
A common stock. We intend to use the net proceeds we receive from this offering primarily for general
corporate purposes, including working capital . . . research and development, business development,
sales and marketing activities and capital expenditures.”

[6]

On September 28, 2017, Roku “went public” and exceeded expectations. Prior to the IPO, Roku estimated
it would sell between $12 and $14 per share, raising over $117 million for the company. The closing price
per share on September 28 was $23.50, nearly doubling initial expectations for the share value.

[7]

Distributions to Owners
There are basically two ways in which organizations become less valuable in terms of owners’ equity: from
unprofitable operations (when expenses or losses exceed revenues or gains) and by distributions to owners.
Owners (investors) of an organization want to see their investment appreciate (gain) in value. Over time,
owners of common stock can see the value of the stock increase in value—the share price increases—due to
the success of the organization. Organizations may also make distributions to owners, which are periodic
rewards issued to the owners in the form of cash or other assets. Distributions to owners represent some of
the value (equity) of the organization.

5 Roku, Inc. “Form S-1 Filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.” September 1, 2017. https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/
1428439/000119312517275689/d403225ds1.htm
6 Roku, Inc. “Form S-1 Filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.” September 1, 2017. https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/
1428439/000119312517275689/d403225ds1.htm
7 Roku, Inc. Data. https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/ROKU/history?p=ROKU

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

73

For investors who hold common stock in the organization, these periodic payments or distributions to owners
are called dividends. For sole proprietorships, distributions to owners are withdrawals or drawings. From the
organization’s perspective, dividends represent a portion of the net worth (equity) of the organization that is
returned to owners as a reward for their investment. While issuing dividends does, in fact, reduce the
organization’s assets, some argue that paying dividends increases the organization’s long-term value by
making the stock more desirable. (Note that this topic falls under the category of “dividend policy” and there
is a significant stream of research addressing this.)

Balance Sheet
Once the statement of owner’s equity is completed, accountants typically complete the balance sheet, a
statement that lists what the organization owns (assets), what it owes (liabilities), and what it is worth (equity)
on a specific date. Notice the change in timing of the report. The income statement and statement of owner’s
equity report the financial performance and equity change for a period of time. The balance sheet, however,
lists the financial position at the close of business on a specific date. (Refer to Figure 2.2 for the balance sheet
as of August 31, 2020, for Chris’ Landscaping.)

Figure 2.2

“Balance Sheet for Chris’ Landscaping.” (attribution: Copyright, Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Assets
If you recall our previous example involving Chris and her newly established landscaping business, you are
[8]

probably already familiar with the term asset —these are resources used to generate revenue. In Chris’s
business, to keep the example relatively simple, the business ended the month with one asset, cash, assuming
that the insurance was for one month’s coverage.
However, as organizations become more complex, they often have dozens or more types of assets. An asset
can be categorized as a short-term asset or current asset (which is typically used up, sold, or converted to
cash in one year or less) or as a long-term asset or noncurrent asset (which is not expected to be converted
into cash or used up within one year). Long-term assets are often used in the production of products and
services.
Examples of short-term assets that businesses own include cash, accounts receivable, and inventory, while
examples of long-term assets include land, machinery, office furniture, buildings, and vehicles. Several of the
chapters that you will study are dedicated to an in-depth coverage of the special characteristics of selected

8 The FASB defines assets as “probable future economic benefits obtained or controlled by a particular entity as a result of past transactions
or events” (SFAC No. 6, p. 12).

74

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

assets. Examples include Merchandising Transactions, which are typically short term, and Long-Term Assets,
which are typically long term.
An asset can also be categorized as a tangible asset or an intangible asset. Tangible assets have a physical
nature, such as trucks or many inventory items, while intangible assets have value but often lack a physical
existence or corpus, such as insurance policies or trademarks.

Liabilities
[9]

You are also probably already familiar with the term liability —these are amounts owed to others (called
creditors). A liability can also be categorized as a short-term liability (or current liability) or a long-term
liability (or noncurrent liability), similar to the treatment accorded assets. Short-term liabilities are typically
expected to be paid within one year or less, while long-term liabilities are typically expected to be due for
payment more than one year past the current balance sheet date.
Common short-term liabilities or amounts owed by businesses include amounts owed for items purchased on
credit (also called accounts payable), taxes, wages, and other business costs that will be paid in the future.
Long-term liabilities can include such liabilities as long-term notes payable, mortgages payable, or bonds
payable.

Equity
In the Statement of Owner’s Equity discussion, you learned that equity (or net assets) refers to book value or
net worth. In our example, Chris’s Landscaping, we determined that Chris had $250 worth of equity in her
company at the end of the first month (see Figure 2.2).
At any point in time it is important for stakeholders to know the financial position of a business. Stated
differently, it is important for employees, managers, and other interested parties to understand what a
business owns, owes, and is worth at any given point. This provides stakeholders with valuable financial
information to make decisions related to the business.

Statement of Cash Flows
The fourth and final financial statement prepared is the statement of cash flows, which is a statement that
lists the cash inflows and cash outflows for the business for a period of time. At first glance, this may seem like
a redundant financial statement. We know the income statement also reports the inflows and outflows for the
business for a period of time. In addition, the statement of owner’s equity and the balance sheet help to show
the other activities, such as investments by and distributions to owners that are not included in the income
statement. To understand why the statement of cash flows is necessary, we must first understand the two
bases of accounting used to prepare the financial statements. The changes in cash within this statement are
often referred to as sources and uses of cash. A source of cash lets one see where cash is coming from. For
example, is cash being generated from sales to customers, or is the cash a result of an advance in a large loan.
Use of cash looks at what cash is being used for. Is cash being used to make an interest payment on a loan, or
is cash being used to purchase a large piece of machinery that will expand business capacity? The two bases of
accounting are the cash basis and the accrual basis, briefly introduced in Describe the Income Statement,
Statement of Owner’s Equity, Balance Sheet, and Statement of Cash Flows, and How They Interrelate.

9 The FASB defines liabilities as “probable future sacrifices of economic benefits arising from present obligations of a particular entity to
transfer assets or provide services to other entities in the future as a result of past transactions or events” (SFAC No. 6, p. 13).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

75

Under cash basis accounting, transactions (i.e., a sale or a purchase) are not recorded in the financial
statements until there is an exchange of cash. This type of accounting is permitted for nonprofit entities and
small businesses that elect to use this type of accounting. Under accrual basis accounting, transactions are
generally recorded in the financial statement when the transactions occur, and not when paid, although in
some situations the two events could happen on the same day.
An example of the two methods (cash versus accrual accounting) would probably help clarify their differences.
Assume that a mechanic performs a tune-up on a client’s car on May 29, and the customer picks up her car
and pays the mechanic $100 on June 2. If the mechanic were using the cash method, the revenue would be
recognized on June 2, the date of payment, and any expenses would be recognized when paid.
If the accrual method were used, the mechanic would recognize the revenue and any related expenses on May
29, the day the work was completed. The accrual method will be the basis for your studies here (except for our
coverage of the cash flow statement in Statement of Cash Flows). The accrual method is also discussed in
greater detail in Explain the Steps within the Accounting Cycle through the Unadjusted Trial Balance.
While the cash basis of accounting is suited well and is more efficient for small businesses and certain types of
businesses, such as farming, and those without inventory, like lawyers and doctors, the accrual basis of
accounting is theoretically preferable to the cash basis of accounting. Accrual accounting is advantageous
because it distinguishes between the timing of the transactions (when goods and services are provided) and
when the cash involved in the transactions is exchanged (which can be a significant amount of time after the
initial transaction). This allows accountants to provide, in a timely manner, relevant and complete information
to stakeholders. The Adjustment Process explores several common techniques involved in accrual accounting.
Two brief examples may help illustrate the difference between cash accounting and accrual accounting.
Assume that a business sells $200 worth of merchandise. In some businesses, there are two ways the
customers pay: cash and credit (also referred to as “on account”). Cash sales include checks and credit cards
and are paid at the time of the sale. Credit sales (not to be confused with credit card sales) allow the customer
to take the merchandise but pay within a specified period of time, usually up to forty-five days.
A cash sale would be recorded in the financial statements under both the cash basis and accrual basis of
accounting. It makes sense because the customer received the merchandise and paid the business at the
same time. It is considered two events that occur simultaneously (exchange of merchandise for cash).
Similar to the previous example for the mechanic, a credit sale, however, would be treated differently under
each of these types of accounting. Under the cash basis of accounting, a credit sale would not be recorded in
the financial statements until the cash is received, under terms stipulated by the seller. For example, assume
on April 1 a landscaping business provides $500 worth of services to one of its customers. The sale is made on
account, with the payment due forty-five days later. Under the cash basis of accounting, the revenue would
not be recorded until May 16, when the cash was received. Under the accrual basis of accounting, this sale
would be recorded in the financial statements at the time the services were provided, April 1. The reason the
sale would be recorded is, under accrual accounting, the business reports that it provided $500 worth of
services to its customer. The fact the customers will pay later is viewed as a separate transaction under accrual
accounting (Figure 2.3).

76

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Figure 2.3

Credit versus Cash. On the left is a credit sale recorded under the cash basis of accounting. On

the right the same credit sale is recorded under the accrual basis of accounting. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Let’s now explore the difference between the cash basis and accrual basis of accounting using an expense.
Assume a business purchases $160 worth of printing supplies from a supplier (vendor). Similar to a sale, a
purchase of merchandise can be paid for at the time of sale using cash (also a check or credit card) or at a later
date (on account). A purchase paid with cash at the time of the sale would be recorded in the financial
statements under both cash basis and accrual basis of accounting. It makes sense because the business
received the printing supplies from the supplier and paid the supplier at the same time. It is considered two
events that occur simultaneously (exchange of merchandise for cash).
If the purchase was made on account (also called a credit purchase), however, the transaction would be
recorded differently under each of these types of accounting. Under the cash basis of accounting, the $160
purchase on account would not be recorded in the financial statements until the cash is paid, as stipulated by
the seller’s terms. For example, if the printing supplies were received on July 17 and the payment terms were
fifteen days, no transaction would be recorded until August 1, when the goods were paid for. Under the
accrual basis of accounting, this purchase would be recorded in the financial statements at the time the
business received the printing supplies from the supplier (July 17). The reason the purchase would be recorded
is that the business reports that it bought $160 worth of printing supplies from its vendors. The fact the
business will pay later is viewed as a separate issue under accrual accounting. Table 2.2 summarizes these
examples under the different bases of accounting.
Transactions by Cash Basis versus Accrual Basis of Accounting
Transaction
$200 sale for cash

Under Cash Basis Accounting

Under Accrual Basis Accounting

Recorded in financial statements at time

Recorded in financial statements at

of sale

time of sale

$200 sale on

Not recorded in financial statements until

Recorded in financial statements at

account

cash is received

time of sale

$160 purchase for

Recorded in financial statements at time

Recorded in financial statements at

cash

of purchase

time of purchase

Table 2.2 Businesses often sell items for cash as well as on account, where payment terms are extended for a
period of time (for example, thirty to forty-five days). Likewise, businesses often purchase items from suppliers
(also called vendors) for cash or, more likely, on account. Under the cash basis of accounting, these
transactions would not be recorded until the cash is exchanged. In contrast, under accrual accounting the
transactions are recorded when the transaction occurs, regardless of when the cash is received or paid.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

77

Transactions by Cash Basis versus Accrual Basis of Accounting
Transaction

Under Cash Basis Accounting

Under Accrual Basis Accounting

$160 purchase on

Not recorded in financial statements until

Recorded in financial statements at

account

cash is paid

time of purchase

Table 2.2 Businesses often sell items for cash as well as on account, where payment terms are extended for a
period of time (for example, thirty to forty-five days). Likewise, businesses often purchase items from suppliers
(also called vendors) for cash or, more likely, on account. Under the cash basis of accounting, these
transactions would not be recorded until the cash is exchanged. In contrast, under accrual accounting the
transactions are recorded when the transaction occurs, regardless of when the cash is received or paid.
Knowing the difference between the cash basis and accrual basis of accounting is necessary to understand the
need for the statement of cash flows. Stakeholders need to know the financial performance (as measured by
the income statement—that is, net income or net loss) and financial position (as measured by the balance
sheet—that is, assets, liabilities, and owners’ equity) of the business. This information is provided in the
income statement, statement of owner’s equity, and balance sheet. However, since these financial statements
are prepared using accrual accounting, stakeholders do not have a clear picture of the business’s cash
activities. The statement of cash flows solves this inadequacy by specifically focusing on the cash inflows and
cash outflows.

2.2

Define, Explain, and Provide Examples of Current and Noncurrent Assets,

Current and Noncurrent Liabilities, Equity, Revenues, and Expenses
In addition to what you’ve already learned about assets and liabilities, and their potential categories, there are
a couple of other points to understand about assets. Plus, given the importance of these concepts, it helps to
have an additional review of the material.
To help clarify these points, we return to our coffee shop example and now think of the coffee shop’s
assets—items the coffee shop owns or controls. Review the list of assets you created for the local coffee shop.
Did you happen to notice many of the items on your list have one thing in common: the items will be used
over a long period of time? In accounting, we classify assets based on whether or not the asset will be used or
consumed within a certain period of time, generally one year. If the asset will be used or consumed in one year
or less, we classify the asset as a current asset. If the asset will be used or consumed over more than one
year, we classify the asset as a noncurrent asset.
Another thing you might have recognized when reviewing your list of coffee shop assets is that all of the items
were something you could touch or move, each of which is known as a tangible asset. However, as you also
learned in Describe the Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, Balance Sheet, and Statement of
Cash Flows, and How They Interrelate, not all assets are tangible. An asset could be an intangible asset,
meaning the item lacks physical substance—it cannot be touched or moved. Take a moment to think about
your favorite type of shoe or a popular type of farm tractor. Would you be able to recognize the maker of that
shoe or the tractor by simply seeing the logo? Chances are you would. These are examples of intangible
assets, trademarks to be precise. A trademark has value to the organization that created (or purchased) the
trademark, and the trademark is something the organization controls—others cannot use the trademark
without permission.

78

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Similar to the accounting for assets, liabilities are classified based on the time frame in which the liabilities are
expected to be settled. A liability that will be settled in one year or less (generally) is classified as a current
liability, while a liability that is expected to be settled in more than one year is classified as a noncurrent
liability.
Examples of current assets include accounts receivable, which is the outstanding customer debt on a credit
sale; inventory, which is the value of products to be sold or items to be converted into sellable products; and
sometimes a notes receivable, which is the value of amounts loaned that will be received in the future with
interest, assuming that it will be paid within a year.
Examples of current liabilities include accounts payable, which is the value of goods or services purchased
that will be paid for at a later date, and notes payable, which is the value of amounts borrowed (usually not
inventory purchases) that will be paid in the future with interest.
Examples of noncurrent assets include notes receivable (notice notes receivable can be either current or
noncurrent), land, buildings, equipment, and vehicles. An example of a noncurrent liability is notes payable
(notice notes payable can be either current or noncurrent).

Why Does Current versus Noncurrent Matter?
At this point, let’s take a break and explore why the distinction between current and noncurrent assets and
liabilities matters. It is a good question because, on the surface, it does not seem to be important to make
such a distinction. After all, assets are things owned or controlled by the organization, and liabilities are
amounts owed by the organization; listing those amounts in the financial statements provides valuable
information to stakeholders. But we have to dig a little deeper and remind ourselves that stakeholders are
using this information to make decisions. Providing the amounts of the assets and liabilities answers the
“what” question for stakeholders (that is, it tells stakeholders the value of assets), but it does not answer the
“when” question for stakeholders. For example, knowing that an organization has $1,000,000 worth of assets
is valuable information, but knowing that $250,000 of those assets are current and will be used or consumed
within one year is more valuable to stakeholders. Likewise, it is helpful to know the company owes $750,000
worth of liabilities, but knowing that $125,000 of those liabilities will be paid within one year is even more
valuable. In short, the timing of events is of particular interest to stakeholders.

THINK IT THROUGH
Borrowing
When money is borrowed by an individual or family from a bank or other lending institution, the loan is
considered a personal or consumer loan. Typically, payments on these types of loans begin shortly after
the funds are borrowed. Student loans are a special type of consumer borrowing that has a different
structure for repayment of the debt. If you are not familiar with the special repayment arrangement for
student loans, do a brief internet search to find out when student loan payments are expected to begin.
Now, assume a college student has two loans—one for a car and one for a student loan. Assume the
person gets the flu, misses a week of work at his campus job, and does not get paid for the absence.
Which loan would the person be most concerned about paying? Why?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

79

Equity and Legal Structure
Recall that equity can also be referred to as net worth—the value of the organization. The concept of equity
does not change depending on the legal structure of the business (sole proprietorship, partnership, and
corporation). The terminology does, however, change slightly based on the type of entity. For example,
investments by owners are considered “capital” transactions for sole proprietorships and partnerships but are
considered “common stock” transactions for corporations. Likewise, distributions to owners are considered
“drawing” transactions for sole proprietorships and partnerships but are considered “dividend” transactions
for corporations.
As another example, in sole proprietorships and partnerships, the final amount of net income or net loss for
the business becomes “Owner(s), Capital.” In a corporation, net income or net loss for the business becomes
retained earnings, which is the cumulative, undistributed net income or net loss, less dividends paid for the
business since its inception.
The essence of these transactions remains the same: organizations become more valuable when owners make
investments in the business and the businesses earn a profit (net income), and organizations become less
valuable when owners receive distributions (dividends) from the organization and the businesses incur a loss
(net loss). Because accountants are providing information to stakeholders, it is important for accountants to
fully understand the specific terminology associated with the various legal structures of organizations.

The Accounting Equation
Recall the simple example of a home loan discussed in Describe the Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s
Equity, Balance Sheet, and Statement of Cash Flows, and How They Interrelate. In that example, we assumed a
family purchased a home valued at $200,000 and made a down payment of $25,000 while financing the
remaining balance with a $175,000 bank loan. This example demonstrates one of the most important concepts
in the study of accounting: the accounting equation, which is:

In our example, the accounting equation would look like this:

$200,000 = $175,000 + $25,000
As you continue your accounting studies and you consider the different major types of business entities
available (sole proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations), there is another important concept for you to
remember. This concept is that no matter which of the entity options that you choose, the accounting process
for all of them will be predicated on the accounting equation.
It may be helpful to think of the accounting equation from a “sources and claims” perspective. Under this
approach, the assets (items owned by the organization) were obtained by incurring liabilities or were provided
by owners. Stated differently, every asset has a claim against it—by creditors and/or owners.

80

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

YOUR TURN
The Accounting Equation
On a sheet of paper, use three columns to create your own accounting equation. In the first column, list
all of the things you own (assets). In the second column, list any amounts owed (liabilities). In the third
column, using the accounting equation, calculate, you guessed it, the net amount of the asset (equity).
When finished, total the columns to determine your net worth. Hint: do not forget to subtract the liability
from the value of the asset.
Here is something else to consider: is it possible to have negative equity? It sure is . . . ask any college
student who has taken out loans. At first glance there is no asset directly associated with the amount of
the loan. But is that, in fact, the case? You might ask yourself why make an investment in a college
education—what is the benefit (asset) to going to college? The answer lies in the difference in lifetime
earnings with a college degree versus without a college degree. This is influenced by many things,
including the supply and demand of jobs and employees. It is also influenced by the earnings for the
type of college degree pursued. (Where do you think accounting ranks?)
Solution
Answers will vary but may include vehicles, clothing, electronics (include cell phones and computer/
gaming systems, and sports equipment). They may also include money owed on these assets, most likely
vehicles and perhaps cell phones. In the case of a student loan, there may be a liability with no
corresponding asset (yet). Responses should be able to evaluate the benefit of investing in college is the
wage differential between earnings with and without a college degree.

Expanding the Accounting Equation
Let’s continue our exploration of the accounting equation, focusing on the equity component, in particular.
Recall that we defined equity as the net worth of an organization. It is helpful to also think of net worth as the
value of the organization. Recall, too, that revenues (inflows as a result of providing goods and services)
increase the value of the organization. So, every dollar of revenue an organization generates increases the
overall value of the organization.
Likewise, expenses (outflows as a result of generating revenue) decrease the value of the organization. So,
each dollar of expenses an organization incurs decreases the overall value of the organization. The same
approach can be taken with the other elements of the financial statements:
• Gains increase the value (equity) of the organization.
• Losses decrease the value (equity) of the organization.
• Investments by owners increase the value (equity) of the organization.
• Distributions to owners decrease the value (equity) of the organization.
• Changes in assets and liabilities can either increase or decrease the value (equity) of the organization
depending on the net result of the transaction.
A graphical representation of this concept is shown in Figure 2.4.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Figure 2.4

81

Graphical Representation of the Accounting Equation. Both assets and liabilities are categorized

as current and noncurrent. Also highlighted are the various activities that affect the equity (or net worth) of
the business. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The format of this illustration is also intended to introduce you to a concept you will learn more about in your
study of accounting. Notice each account subcategory (Current Assets and Noncurrent Assets, for example)
has an “increase” side and a “decrease” side. These are called T-accounts and will be used to analyze
transactions, which is the beginning of the accounting process. See Analyzing and Recording Transactions for
a more comprehensive discussion of analyzing transactions and T-Accounts.

Not All Transactions Affect Equity
As you continue to develop your understanding of accounting, you will encounter many types of transactions
involving different elements of the financial statements. The previous examples highlighted elements that
change the equity of an organization. Not all transactions, however, ultimately impact equity. For example, the
following do not impact the equity or net worth of the organization:

[10]

• Exchanges of assets for assets
• Exchanges of liabilities for liabilities
• Acquisitions of assets by incurring liabilities
• Settlements of liabilities by transferring assets
It is important to understand the inseparable connection between the elements of the financial statements
and the possible impact on organizational equity (value). We explore this connection in greater detail as we
return to the financial statements.

2.3

Prepare an Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, and Balance

Sheet
One of the key factors for success for those beginning the study of accounting is to understand how the
elements of the financial statements relate to each of the financial statements. That is, once the transactions
are categorized into the elements, knowing what to do next is vital. This is the beginning of the process to
create the financial statements. It is important to note that financial statements are discussed in the order in
which the statements are presented.

10

SFAC No. 6, p. 20.

82

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Elements of the Financial Statements
When thinking of the relationship between the elements and the financial statements, we might think of a
baking analogy: the elements represent the ingredients, and the financial statements represent the finished
product. As with baking a cake (see Figure 2.5), knowing the ingredients (elements) and how each ingredient
relates to the final product (financial statements) is vital to the study of accounting.

Figure 2.5

Baking requires an understanding of the different ingredients, how the ingredients are used, and

how the ingredients will impact the final product (a). If used correctly, the final product will be beautiful and,
more importantly, delicious, like the cake shown in (b). In a similar manner, the study of accounting requires
an understanding of how the accounting elements relate to the final product—the financial statements. (credit
(a): modification of “U.S. Navy Culinary Specialist Seaman Robert Fritschie mixes cake batter aboard the
amphibious command ship USS Blue Ridge (LCC 19) Aug. 7, 2013, while underway in the Solomon Sea
130807-N-NN332-044” by MC3 Jarred Harral/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit (b): modification of
“Easter Cake with Colorful Topping” by Kaboompics .com/Pexels, CC0)
To help accountants prepare and users better understand financial statements, the profession has outlined
what is referred to as elements of the financial statements, which are those categories or accounts that
accountants use to record transactions and prepare financial statements. There are ten elements of the
financial statements, and we have already discussed most of them.
• Revenue—value of goods and services the organization sold or provided.
• Expenses—costs of providing the goods or services for which the organization earns revenue.
• Gains—gains are similar to revenue but relate to “incidental or peripheral” activities of the organization.
• Losses—losses are similar to expenses but related to “incidental or peripheral” activities of the
organization.
• Assets—items the organization owns, controls, or has a claim to.
• Liabilities—amounts the organization owes to others (also called creditors).
• Equity—the net worth (or net assets) of the organization.
• Investment by owners—cash or other assets provided to the organization in exchange for an ownership
interest.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

83

• Distribution to owners—cash, other assets, or ownership interest (equity) provided to owners.
• Comprehensive income—defined as the “change in equity of a business enterprise during a period from
transactions and other events and circumstances from nonowner sources” (SFAC No. 6, p. 21). While
further discussion of comprehensive income is reserved for intermediate and advanced studies in
accounting, it is worth noting that comprehensive income has four components, focusing on activities
related to foreign currency, derivatives, investments, and pensions.

Financial Statements for a Sample Company
Now it is time to bake the cake (i.e., prepare the financial statements). We have all of the ingredients (elements
of the financial statements) ready, so let’s now return to the financial statements themselves. Let’s use as an
example a fictitious company named Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn. This company is a small retail store that
makes and sells a variety of gourmet popcorn treats. It is an exciting time because the store opened in the
current month, June.
Assume that as part of your summer job with Cheesy Chuck’s, the owner—you guessed it, Chuck—has asked
you to take over for a former employee who graduated college and will be taking an accounting job in New
York City. In addition to your duties involving making and selling popcorn at Cheesy Chuck’s, part of your
responsibility will be doing the accounting for the business. The owner, Chuck, heard that you are studying
accounting and could really use the help, because he spends most of his time developing new popcorn flavors.
The former employee has done a nice job of keeping track of the accounting records, so you can focus on your
first task of creating the June financial statements, which Chuck is eager to see. Figure 2.6 shows the financial
information (as of June 30) for Cheesy Chuck’s.

Figure 2.6

Trial Balance for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn. Accountants record and summarize accounting

information into accounts, which help to track, summarize, and prepare accounting information. This table is a
variation of what accountants call a “trial balance.” A trial balance is a summary of accounts and aids
accountants in creating financial statements. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BYNC-SA 4.0 license)

84

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

We should note that we are oversimplifying some of the things in this example. First, the amounts in the
accounting records were given. We did not explain how the amounts would be derived. This process is
explained starting in Analyzing and Recording Transactions. Second, we are ignoring the timing of certain cash
flows such as hiring, purchases, and other startup costs. In reality, businesses must invest cash to prepare the
store, train employees, and obtain the equipment and inventory necessary to open. These costs will precede
the selling of goods and services. In the example to follow, for instance, we use Lease payments of $24,000,
which represents lease payments for the building ($20,000) and equipment ($4,000). In practice, when
companies lease items, the accountants must determine, based on accounting rules, whether or not the
business “owns” the item. If it is determined the business “owns” the building or equipment, the item is listed
on the balance sheet at the original cost. Accountants also take into account the building or equipment’s value
when the item is worn out. The difference in these two values (the original cost and the ending value) will be
allocated over a relevant period of time. As an example, assume a business purchased equipment for $18,000
and the equipment will be worth $2,000 after four years, giving an estimated decline in value (due to usage) of
$16,000 ($18,000 − $2,000). The business will allocate $4,000 of the equipment cost over each of the four years
($18,000 minus $2,000 over four years). This is called depreciation and is one of the topics that is covered in
Long-Term Assets.
Also, the Equipment with a value of $12,500 in the financial information provided was purchased at the end of
the first accounting period. It is an asset that will be depreciated in the future, but no depreciation expense is
allocated in our example.

Income Statement
Let’s prepare the income statement so we can inform how Cheesy Chuck’s performed for the month of June
(remember, an income statement is for a period of time). Our first step is to determine the value of goods and
services that the organization sold or provided for a given period of time. These are the inflows to the
business, and because the inflows relate to the primary purpose of the business (making and selling popcorn),
we classify those items as Revenues, Sales, or Fees Earned. For this example, we use Revenue. The revenue for
Cheesy Chuck’s for the month of June is $85,000.
Next, we need to show the total expenses for Cheesy Chuck’s. Because Cheesy Chuck’s tracks different types
of expenses, we need to add the amounts to calculate total expenses. If you added correctly, you get total
expenses for the month of June of $79,200. The final step to create the income statement is to determine the
amount of net income or net loss for Cheesy Chuck’s. Since revenues ($85,000) are greater than expenses
($79,200), Cheesy Chuck’s has a net income of $5,800 for the month of June.
Figure 2.7 displays the June income statement for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Figure 2.7

85

Income Statement for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn. The income statement for Cheesy Chuck’s

shows the business had Net Income of $5,800 for the month ended June 30. This amount will be used to
prepare the next financial statement, the statement of owner’s equity. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Financial statements are created using numerous standard conventions or practices. The standard
conventions provide consistency and help assure financial statement users the information is presented in a
similar manner, regardless of the organization issuing the financial statement. Let’s look at the standard
conventions shown in the Cheesy Chuck’s income statement:
• The heading of the income statement includes three lines.
◦ The first line lists the business name.
◦ The middle line indicates the financial statement that is being presented.
◦ The last line indicates the time frame of the financial statement. Do not forget the income statement
is for a period of time (the month of June in our example).
• There are three columns.
◦ Going from left to right, the first column is the category heading or account.
◦ The second column is used when there are numerous accounts in a particular category (Expenses, in
our example).
◦ The third column is a total column. In this illustration, it is the column where subtotals are listed and
net income is determined (subtracting Expenses from Revenues).
• Subtotals are indicated by a single underline, while totals are indicated by a double underline. Notice the
amount of Miscellaneous Expense ($300) is formatted with a single underline to indicate that a subtotal
will follow. Similarly, the amount of “Net Income” ($5,800) is formatted with a double underline to
indicate that it is the final value/total of the financial statement.
• There are no gains or losses for Cheesy Chuck’s. Gains and losses are not unusual transactions for
businesses, but gains and losses may be infrequent for some, especially small, businesses.

86

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
McDonald’s
For the year ended December 31, 2016, McDonald’s had sales of $24.6 billion.

[11]

The amount of sales is

often used by the business as the starting point for planning the next year. No doubt, there are a lot of
people involved in the planning for a business the size of McDonald’s. Two key people at McDonald’s are
the purchasing manager and the sales manager (although they might have different titles). Let’s look at
how McDonald’s 2016 sales amount might be used by each of these individuals. In each case, do not
forget that McDonald’s is a global company.
A purchasing manager at McDonald’s, for example, is responsible for finding suppliers, negotiating
costs, arranging for delivery, and many other functions necessary to have the ingredients ready for the
stores to prepare the food for their customers. Expecting that McDonald’s will have over $24 billion of
sales during 2017, how many eggs do you think the purchasing manager at McDonald’s would need to
purchase for the year? According to the McDonald’s website, the company uses over two billion eggs a
year.

[12]

Take a moment to list the details that would have to be coordinated in order to purchase and

deliver over two billion eggs to the many McDonald’s restaurants around the world.
A sales manager is responsible for establishing and attaining sales goals within the company. Assume
that McDonald’s 2017 sales are expected to exceed the amount of sales in 2016. What conclusions would
you make based on this information? What do you think might be influencing these amounts? What
factors do you think would be important to the sales manager in deciding what action, if any, to take?
Now assume that McDonald’s 2017 sales are expected to be below the 2016 sales level. What conclusions
would you make based on this information? What do you think might be influencing these amounts?
What factors do you think would be important to the sales manager in deciding what action, if any, to
take?

Statement of Owner’s Equity
Let’s create the statement of owner’s equity for Cheesy Chuck’s for the month of June. Since Cheesy Chuck’s is
a brand-new business, there is no beginning balance of Owner’s Equity. The first items to account for are the
increases in value/equity, which are investments by owners and net income. As you look at the accounting
information you were provided, you recognize the amount invested by the owner, Chuck, was $12,500. Next,
we account for the increase in value as a result of net income, which was determined in the income statement
to be $5,800. Next, we determine if there were any activities that decreased the value of the business. More
specifically, we are accounting for the value of distributions to the owners and net loss, if any.
It is important to note that an organization will have either net income or net loss for the period, but not both.
Also, small businesses in particular may have periods where there are no investments by, or distributions to,
the owner(s). For the month of June, Chuck withdrew $1,450 from the business. This is a good time to recall the

11 McDonald’s Corporation. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 10-K Filing. March 1, 2017. http://d18rn0p25nwr6d.cloudfront.net/
CIK-0000063908/62200c2b-da82-4364-be92-79ed454e3b88.pdf
12 McDonald’s. “Our Food. Your Questions. Breakfast.” n.d. https://www.mcdonalds.com/us/en-us/about-our-food/our-food-your-questions/
breakfast.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

87

terminology used by accountants based on the legal structure of the particular business. Since the account
was titled “Drawings by Owner” and because Chuck is the only owner, we can assume this is a sole
proprietorship. If the business was structured as a corporation, this activity would be called something like
“Dividends Paid to Owners.”
At this stage, remember that since we are working with a sole proprietorship to help simplify the examples, we
have addressed the owner’s value in the firm as capital or owner’s equity. However, later we switch the
structure of the business to a corporation, and instead of owner’s equity, we begin using such account titles as
common stock and retained earnings to represent the owner’s interests. The corporate treatment is more
complicated, because corporations may have a few owners up to potentially thousands of owners
(stockholders). The details of accounting for the interests of corporations are covered in Corporation
Accounting.
So how much did the value of Cheesy Chuck’s change during the month of June? You are correct if you
answered $16,850. Since this is a brand-new store, the beginning value of the business is zero. During the
month, the owner invested $12,500 and the business had profitable operations (net income) of $5,800. Also,
during the month the owner withdrew $1,450, resulting in a net change (and ending balance) to owner’s
equity of $16,850. Shown in a formula:
Beginning Balance + Investments by Owners ± Net Income (Net Loss) – Distributions, or

$0 + $12,500 + $5,800 – $1,450 = $16,850
Figure 2.8 shows what the statement of owner’s equity for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn would look like.

Figure 2.8

Statement of Owner’s Equity for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn. The statement of owner’s equity

demonstrates how the net worth (also called equity) of the business changed over the period of time (the
month of June in this case). Notice the amount of net income (or net loss) is brought from the income
statement. In a similar manner, the ending equity balance (Capital for Cheesy Chuck’s because it is a sole
proprietorship) is carried forward to the balance sheet. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Notice the following about the statement of owner’s equity for Cheesy Chuck’s:
• The format is similar to the format of the income statement (three lines for the heading, three columns).
• The statement follows a chronological order, starting with the first day of the month, accounting for the

88

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

changes that occurred throughout the month, and ending with the final day of the month.
The statement uses the final number from the financial statement previously completed. In this case, the
statement of owner’s equity uses the net income (or net loss) amount from the income statement (Net
Income, $5,800).

Balance Sheet
Let’s create a balance sheet for Cheesy Chuck’s for June 30. To begin, we look at the accounting records and
determine what assets the business owns and the value of each. Cheesy Chuck’s has two assets: Cash ($6,200)
and Equipment ($12,500). Adding the amount of assets gives a total asset value of $18,700. As discussed
previously, the equipment that was recently purchased will be depreciated in the future, beginning with the
next accounting period.
Next, we determine the amount of money that Cheesy Chuck’s owes (liabilities). There are also two liabilities
for Cheesy Chuck’s. The first account listed in the records is Accounts Payable for $650. Accounts Payable is the
amount that Cheesy Chuck’s must pay in the future to vendors (also called suppliers) for the ingredients to
make the gourmet popcorn. The other liability is Wages Payable for $1,200. This is the amount that Cheesy
Chuck’s must pay in the future to employees for work that has been performed. Adding the two amounts
gives us total liabilities of $1,850. (Here’s a hint as you develop your understanding of accounting: Liabilities
often include the word “payable.” So, when you see “payable” in the account title, know these are amounts
owed in the future—liabilities.)
Finally, we determine the amount of equity the owner, Cheesy Chuck, has in the business. The amount of
owner’s equity was determined on the statement of owner’s equity in the previous step ($16,850). Can you
think of another way to confirm the amount of owner’s equity? Recall that equity is also called net assets
(assets minus liabilities). If you take the total assets of Cheesy Chuck’s of $18,700 and subtract the total
liabilities of $1,850, you get owner’s equity of $16,850. Using the basic accounting equation, the balance sheet
for Cheesy Chuck’s as of June 30 is shown in Figure 2.9.

Figure 2.9

Balance Sheet for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn. The balance sheet shows what the business owns

(Assets), owes (Liabilities), and is worth (equity) on a given date. Notice the amount of Owner’s Equity (Capital
for Cheesy Chuck’s) was brought forward from the statement of owner’s equity. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Connecting the Income Statement and the Balance Sheet
Another way to think of the connection between the income statement and balance sheet (which is aided by

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

89

the statement of owner’s equity) is by using a sports analogy. The income statement summarizes the financial
performance of the business for a given period of time. The income statement reports how the business
performed financially each month—the firm earned either net income or net loss. This is similar to the
outcome of a particular game—the team either won or lost.
The balance sheet summarizes the financial position of the business on a given date. Meaning, because of the
financial performance over the past twelve months, for example, this is the financial position of the business as
of December 31. Think of the balance sheet as being similar to a team’s overall win/loss record—to a certain
extent a team’s strength can be perceived by its win/loss record.
However, because different companies have different sizes, you do not necessarily want to compare the
balance sheets of two different companies. For example, you would not want to compare a local retail store
with Walmart. In most cases you want to compare a company with its past balance sheet information.

Statement of Cash Flows
In Describe the Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, Balance Sheet, and Statement of Cash Flows,
and How They Interrelate, we discussed the function of and the basic characteristics of the statement of cash
flows. This fourth and final financial statement lists the cash inflows and cash outflows for the business for a
period of time. It was created to fill in some informational gaps that existed in the other three statements
(income statement, owner’s equity/retained earnings statement, and the balance sheet). A full demonstration
of the creation of the statement of cash flows is presented in Statement of Cash Flows.

Creating Financial Statements: A Summary
In this example using a fictitious company, Cheesy Chuck’s, we began with the account balances and
demonstrated how to prepare the financial statements for the month of June, the first month of operations for
the business. It will be helpful to revisit the process by summarizing the information we started with and how
that information was used to create the four financial statements: income statement, statement of owner’s
equity, balance sheet, and statement of cash flows.
We started with the account balances shown in Figure 2.10.

90

Figure 2.10

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Account Balances for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn. Obtaining the account balances is the

starting point for preparing financial statements. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The next step was to create the income statement, which shows the financial performance of the business. The
income statement is shown in Figure 2.11.

Figure 2.11

Income Statement for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn. The income statement uses information

from the trial balance, which lists the accounts and account totals. The income statement shows the financial
performance of a business for a period of time. The net income or net loss will be carried forward to the
statement of owner’s equity. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Next, we created the statement of owner’s equity, shown in Figure 2.12. The statement of owner’s equity
demonstrates how the equity (or net worth) of the business changed for the month of June. Do not forget that
the Net Income (or Net Loss) is carried forward to the statement of owner’s equity.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Figure 2.12

91

Statement of Owner’s Equity for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn. The statement of owner’s equity

shows how the net worth/value (or equity) of business changed for the period of time. This statement includes
Net Income (or Net Loss), which was brought forward from the income statement. The ending balance is
carried forward to the balance sheet. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)
The third financial statement created is the balance sheet, which shows the company’s financial position on a
given date. Cheesy Chuck’s balance sheet is shown in Figure 2.13.

Figure 2.13

Balance Sheet for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn. The balance sheet shows the assets, liabilities,

and owner’s equity of a business on a given date. Notice the balance sheet is the accounting equation in
financial statement form: Assets = Liabilities + Owner’s Equity. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

92

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

THINK IT THROUGH
Financial Statement Analysis
In Why It Matters, we pointed out that accounting information from the financial statements can be
useful to business owners. The financial statements provide feedback to the owners regarding the
financial performance and financial position of the business, helping the owners to make decisions about
the business.
Using the June financial statements, analyze Cheesy Chuck’s and prepare a brief presentation. Consider
this from the perspective of the owner, Chuck. Describe the financial performance of and financial
position of the business. What areas of the business would you want to analyze further to get additional
information? What changes would you consider making to the business, if any, and why or why not?

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Financial Statement Manipulation at Waste Management Inc.
Accountants have an ethical duty to accurately report the financial results of their company and to
ensure that the company’s annual reports communicate relevant information to stakeholders. If
accountants and company management fail to do so, they may incur heavy penalties.
For example, in 2002 the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) charged the top management of
Waste Management, Inc. with inflating profits by $1.7 billion to meet earnings targets in the period
1992–1997. An SEC press release alleged “that defendants fraudulently manipulated the company’s
financial results to meet predetermined earnings targets. . . . They employed a multitude of improper
accounting practices to achieve this objective.”

[13]

The defendants in the case manipulated reports to

defer or eliminate expenses, which fraudulently inflated their earnings. Because they failed to accurately
report the financial results of their company, the top accountants and management of Waste
Management, Inc. face charges.
Thomas C. Newkirk, the associate director of the SEC’s Division of Enforcement, stated, “For years, these
defendants cooked the books, enriched themselves, preserved their jobs, and duped unsuspecting
shareholders”

[14]

The defendants, who included members of the company board and executives,

benefited personally from their fraud in the millions of dollars through performance-based bonuses,
charitable giving, and sale of company stock. The company’s accounting form, Arthur Andersen, abetted
the fraud by identifying the improper practices but doing little to stop them.

13 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “Waste Management Founder, Five Other Former Top Officers Sued for Massive Fraud.” March
26, 2002. https://www.sec.gov/news/headlines/wastemgmt6.htm
14 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “Waste Management Founder, Five Other Former Top Officers Sued for Massive Fraud.” March
26, 2002. https://www.sec.gov/news/headlines/wastemgmt6.htm

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

93

Liquidity Ratios
In addition to reviewing the financial statements in order to make decisions, owners and other stakeholders
may also utilize financial ratios to assess the financial health of the organization. While a more in-depth
discussion of financial ratios occurs in Appendix A: Financial Statement Analysis, here we introduce liquidity
ratios, a common, easy, and useful way to analyze the financial statements.
Liquidity refers to the business’s ability to convert assets into cash in order to meet short-term cash needs.
Examples of the most liquid assets include accounts receivable and inventory for merchandising or
manufacturing businesses). The reason these are among the most liquid assets is that these assets will be
turned into cash more quickly than land or buildings, for example. Accounts receivable represents goods or
services that have already been sold and will typically be paid/collected within thirty to forty-five days.
Inventory is less liquid than accounts receivable because the product must first be sold before it generates
cash (either through a cash sale or sale on account). Inventory is, however, more liquid than land or buildings
because, under most circumstances, it is easier and quicker for a business to find someone to purchase its
goods than it is to find a buyer for land or buildings.

Working Capital
The starting point for understanding liquidity ratios is to define working capital—current assets minus
current liabilities. Recall that current assets and current liabilities are amounts generally settled in one year or
less. Working capital (current assets minus current liabilities) is used to assess the dollar amount of assets a
business has available to meet its short-term liabilities. A positive working capital amount is desirable and
indicates the business has sufficient current assets to meet short-term obligations (liabilities) and still has
financial flexibility. A negative amount is undesirable and indicates the business should pay particular
attention to the composition of the current assets (that is, how liquid the current assets are) and to the timing
of the current liabilities. It is unlikely that all of the current liabilities will be due at the same time, but the
amount of working capital gives stakeholders of both small and large businesses an indication of the firm’s
ability to meet its short-term obligations.
One limitation of working capital is that it is a dollar amount, which can be misleading because business sizes
vary. Recall from the discussion on materiality that $1,000, for example, is more material to a small business
(like an independent local movie theater) than it is to a large business (like a movie theater chain). Using
percentages or ratios allows financial statement users to more easily compare small and large businesses.

Current Ratio
The current ratio is closely related to working capital; it represents the current assets divided by current
liabilities. The current ratio utilizes the same amounts as working capital (current assets and current liabilities)
but presents the amount in ratio, rather than dollar, form. That is, the current ratio is defined as current
assets/current liabilities. The interpretation of the current ratio is similar to working capital. A ratio of greater
than one indicates that the firm has the ability to meet short-term obligations with a buffer, while a ratio of
less than one indicates that the firm should pay close attention to the composition of its current assets as well
as the timing of the current liabilities.

Sample Working Capital and Current Ratio Calculations
Assume that Chuck, the owner of Cheesy Chuck’s, wants to assess the liquidity of the business. Figure 2.14
shows the June 30, 2018, balance sheet. Assume the Equipment listed on the balance sheet is a noncurrent

94

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

asset. This is a reasonable assumption as this is the first month of operation and the equipment is expected to
last several years. We also assume the Accounts Payable and Wages Payable will be paid within one year and
are, therefore, classified as current liabilities.

Figure 2.14

Balance Sheet for Cheesy Chuck’s Classic Corn. The balance sheet provides a snapshot of the

company’s financial position. By showing the total assets, total liabilities, and total equity of the business, the
balance sheet provides information that is useful for decision-making. In addition, using ratios can give
stakeholders another view of the company, allowing for comparisons to prior periods and to other businesses.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Working capital is calculated as current assets minus current liabilities. Cheesy Chuck’s has only two assets,
and one of the assets, Equipment, is a noncurrent asset, so the value of current assets is the cash amount of
$6,200. The working capital of Cheesy Chuck’s is $6,200 – $1,850 or $4,350. Since this amount is over $0 (it is
well over $0 in this case), Chuck is confident he has nothing to worry about regarding the liquidity of his
business.
Let’s further assume that Chuck, while attending a popcorn conference for store owners, has a conversation
with the owner of a much larger popcorn store—Captain Caramel’s. The owner of Captain Caramel’s happens
to share the working capital for his store is $52,500. At first Chuck feels his business is not doing so well. But
then he realizes that Captain Caramel’s is located in a much bigger city (with more customers) and has been
around for many years, which has allowed them to build a solid business, which Chuck aspires to do. How
would Chuck compare the liquidity of his new business, opened just one month, with the liquidity of a larger
and more-established business in another market? The answer is by calculating the current ratio, which
removes the size differences (materiality) of the two businesses.
The current ratio is calculated as current assets/current liabilities. We use the same amounts that we used in
the working capital calculation, but this time we divide the amounts rather than subtract the amounts. So
Cheesy Chuck’s current ratio is $6,200 (current assets)/$1,850 (current liabilities), or 3.35. This means that for
every dollar of current liabilities, Cheesy Chuck’s has $3.35 of current assets. Chuck is pleased with the ratio
but does not know how this compares to another popcorn store, so he asked his new friend from Captain
Caramel’s. The owner of Captain Caramel’s shares that his store has a current ratio of 4.25. While it is still
better than Cheesy Chuck’s, Chuck is encouraged to learn that his store is performing at a more competitive
level than he previously thought by comparing the dollar amounts of working capital.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

95

IFRS CONNECTION
IFRS and US GAAP in Financial Statements
Understanding the elements that make up financial statements, the organization of those elements
within the financial statements, and what information each statement relays is important, whether
analyzing the financial statements of a US company or one from Honduras. Since most US companies
apply generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)

[15]

as prescribed by the Financial Accounting

Standards Board (FASB), and most international companies apply some version of the International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS),

[16]

knowing how these two sets of accounting standards are similar

or different regarding the elements of the financial statements will facilitate analysis and decisionmaking.
Both IFRS and US GAAP have the same elements as components of financial statements: assets,
liabilities, equity, income, and expenses. Equity, income, and expenses have similar subcategorization
between the two types of GAAP (US GAAP and IFRS) as described. For example, income can be in the
form of earned income (a lawyer providing legal services) or in the form of gains (interest earned on an
investment account). The definition of each of these elements is similar between IFRS and US GAAP, but
there are some differences that can influence the value of the account or the placement of the account
on the financial statements. Many of these differences are discussed in detail later in this course when
that element—for example, the nuances of accounting for liabilities—is discussed. Here is an example to
illustrate how these minor differences in definition can impact placement within the financial statements
when using US GAAP versus IFRS. ACME Car Rental Company typically rents its cars for a time of two
years or 60,000 miles. At the end of whichever of these two measures occurs first, the cars are sold.
Under both US GAAP and IFRS, the cars are noncurrent assets during the period when they are rented.
Once the cars are being “held for sale,” under IFRS rules, the cars become current assets. However,
under US GAAP, there is no specific rule as to where to list those “held for sale” cars; thus, they could still
list the cars as noncurrent assets. As you learn more about the analysis of companies and financial
information, this difference in placement on the financial statements will become more meaningful. At
this point, simply know that financial analysis can include ratios, which is the comparison of two
numbers, and thus any time you change the denominator or the numerator, the ratio result will change.
There are many similarities and some differences in the actual presentation of the various financial
statements, but these are discussed in The Adjustment Process at which point these similarities and
differences will be more meaningful and easier to follow.

15 Publicly traded companies in the United States must file their financial statements with the SEC, and those statements must be compiled
using US GAAP. However, in some states, private companies can apply IFRS for SMEs (small and medium entities).
16 The following site identifies which countries require IFRS, which use a modified version of IFRS, and which countries prohibit the use of
IFRS. https://www.iasplus.com/en/resources/ifrs-topics/use-of-ifrs

96

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Key Terms
accounting equation assets = liabilities + owner’s equity
accounts payable value of goods or services purchased that will be paid for at a later date
accounts receivable outstanding customer debt on a credit sale, typically receivable within a short time
period
accrual basis accounting accounting system in which revenue is recorded or recognized when earned yet
not necessarily received, and in which expenses are recorded when legally incurred and not necessarily
when paid
asset tangible or intangible resource owned or controlled by a company, individual, or other entity with the
intent that it will provide economic value
balance sheet financial statement that lists what the organization owns (assets), owes (liabilities), and is
worth (equity) on a specific date
cash basis accounting method of accounting in which transactions are not recorded in the financial
statements until there is an exchange of cash
common stock corporation’s primary class of stock issued, with each share representing a partial claim to
ownership or a share of the company’s business
comprehensive income change in equity of a business enterprise during a period from transactions and
other events and circumstances from nonowner sources
corporation legal business structure involving one or more individuals (owners) who are legally distinct
(separate) from the business
current asset asset that will be used or consumed in one year or less
current liability debt or obligation due within one year or, in rare cases, a company’s standard operating
cycle, whichever is greater
current ratio current assets divided by current liabilities; used to determine a company’s liquidity (ability to
meet short-term obligations)
distribution to owner periodic “reward” distributed to owner of cash or other assets
dividend portion of the net worth (equity) that is returned to owners of a corporation as a reward for their
investment
elements of the financial statements categories or groupings used to record transactions and prepare
financial statements
equity residual interest in the assets of an entity that remains after deducting its liabilities
expense cost associated with providing goods or services
gain increase in organizational value from activities that are “incidental or peripheral” to the primary
purpose of the business
income statement financial statement that measures the organization’s financial performance for a given
period of time
initial public offering (IPO) when a company issues shares of its stock to the public for the first time
intangible asset asset with financial value but no physical presence; examples include copyrights, patents,
goodwill, and trademarks
inventory value of products to be sold or items to be converted into sellable products
investment by owner exchange of cash or other assets in exchange for an ownership interest in the
organization
liability probable future sacrifice of economic benefits arising from present obligations of a particular entity
to transfer assets or provide services to other entities in the future as a result of past transactions or

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

97

events
liquidity ability to convert assets into cash in order to meet primarily short-term cash needs or emergencies
long-term asset asset used ongoing in the normal course of business for more than one year that is not
intended to be resold
long-term liability debt settled outside one year or one operating cycle, whichever is longer
loss decrease in organizational value from activities that are “incidental or peripheral” to the primary
purpose of the business
net income when revenues and gains are greater than expenses and losses
net loss when expenses and losses are greater than revenues and gains
noncurrent asset asset that will be used or consumed over more than one year
noncurrent liability liability that is expected to be settled in more than one year
notes payable value of amounts borrowed that will be paid in the future with interest
notes receivable value of amounts loaned that will be received in the future with interest
partnership legal business structure consisting of an association of two or more people who contribute
money, property, or services to operate as co-owners of a business
publicly traded company company whose stock is traded (bought and sold) on an organized stock
exchange
retained earnings cumulative, undistributed net income or net loss for the business since its inception
revenue inflows or other enhancements of assets of an entity or settlements of its liabilities (or a
combination of both) from delivering or producing goods, rendering services, or other activities that
constitute the entity’s ongoing major or central operations
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) federal regulatory agency that regulates corporations with
shares listed and traded on security exchanges through required periodic filings
short-term asset asset typically used up, sold, or converted to cash in one year or less
short-term liability liability typically expected to be paid within one year or less
sole proprietorship legal business structure consisting of a single individual
stakeholder someone affected by decisions made by a company; may include an investor, creditor,
employee, manager, regulator, customer, supplier, and layperson
statement of cash flows financial statement listing the cash inflows and cash outflows for the business for a
period of time
statement of owner’s equity financial statement showing how the equity of the organization changed for a
period of time
tangible asset asset that has physical substance
working capital current assets less current liabilities; sometimes used as a measure of liquidity

Summary
2.1 Describe the Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, Balance Sheet, and Statement of Cash
Flows, and How They Interrelate
• Financial statements provide financial information to stakeholders to help them in making decisions.
• There are four financial statements: income statement, statement of owner’s equity, balance sheet, and
statement of cash flows.
• The income statement measures the financial performance of the organization for a period of time. The
income statement lists revenues, expenses, gains, and losses, which make up net income (or net loss).
• The statement of owner’s equity shows how the net worth of the organization changes for a period of
time. In addition to showing net income or net loss, the statement of owner’s equity shows the

98

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

investments by and distributions to owners.
• The balance sheet shows the organization’s financial position on a given date. The balance sheet lists
assets, liabilities, and owners’ equity.
• The statement of cash flows shows the organization’s cash inflows and cash outflows for a given period of
time. The statement of cash flows is necessary because financial statements are usually prepared using
accrual accounting, which records transactions when they occur rather than waiting until cash is
exchanged.
2.2 Define, Explain, and Provide Examples of Current and Noncurrent Assets, Current and Noncurrent
Liabilities, Equity, Revenues, and Expenses
• Assets and liabilities are categorized into current and noncurrent, based on when the item will be settled.
Assets and liabilities that will be settled in one year or less are classified as current; otherwise, the items
are classified as noncurrent.
• Assets are also categorized based on whether or not the asset has physical substance. Assets with
physical substance are considered tangible assets, while intangible assets lack physical substance.
• The distinction between current and noncurrent assets and liabilities is important because it helps
financial statement users assess the timing of the transactions.
• Three broad categories of legal business structures are sole proprietorship, partnership, and corporation,
with each structure having advantages and disadvantages.
• The accounting equation is Assets = Liabilities + Owner’s Equity. It is important to the study of accounting
because it shows what the organization owns and the sources of (or claims against) those resources.
• Owners’ equity can also be thought of as the net worth or value of the business. There are many factors
that influence equity, including net income or net loss, investments by and distributions to owners,
revenues, gains, losses, expenses, and comprehensive income.
2.3 Prepare an Income Statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, and Balance Sheet
• There are ten financial statement elements: revenues, expenses, gains, losses, assets, liabilities, equity,
investments by owners, distributions to owners, and comprehensive income.
• There are standard conventions for the order of preparing financial statements (income statement,
statement of owner’s equity, balance sheet, and statement of cash flows) and for the format (three-line
heading and columnar structure).
• Financial ratios, which are calculated using financial statement information, are often beneficial to aid in
financial decision-making. Ratios allow for comparisons between businesses and determining trends
between periods within the same business.
• Liquidity ratios assess the firm’s ability to convert assets into cash.
• Working Capital (Current Assets – Current Liabilities) is a liquidity ratio that measures a firm’s ability to
meet current obligations.
• The Current Ratio (Current Assets/Current Liabilities) is similar to Working Capital but allows for
comparisons between firms by determining the proportion of current assets to current liabilities.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Multiple Choice
1.

2.1 Which of these statements is not one of the financial statements?
A.

income statement

B.

balance sheet

C.

statement of cash flows

D.

statement of owner investments

2.

2.1 Stakeholders are less likely to include which of the following groups?
A.

owners

B.

employees

C.

community leaders

D.

competitors

3.

2.1 Identify the correct components of the income statement.
A.

revenues, losses, expenses, and gains

B.

assets, liabilities, and owner’s equity

C.

revenues, expenses, investments by owners, distributions to owners

D.

assets, liabilities, and dividends

4.

2.1 The balance sheet lists which of the following?
A.

assets, liabilities, and owners’ equity

B.

revenues, expenses, gains, and losses

C.

assets, liabilities, and investments by owners

D.

revenues, expenses, gains, and distributions to owners

5.

2.1 Assume a company has a $350 credit (not cash) sale. How would the transaction appear if the

business uses accrual accounting?
A.

$350 would show up on the balance sheet as a sale.

B.

$350 would show up on the income statement as a sale.

C.

$350 would show up on the statement of cash flows as a cash outflow.

D.

The transaction would not be reported because the cash was not exchanged.

6.

2.2 Which of the following statements is true?
A.

Tangible assets lack physical substance.

B.

Tangible assets will be consumed in a year or less.

C.

Tangible assets have physical substance.

D.

Tangible assets will be consumed in over a year.

7.

2.2 Owners have no personal liability under which legal business structure?
A.

a corporation

B.

a partnership

C.

a sole proprietorship

D.

There is liability in every legal business structure.

99

100

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

8.

2.2 The accounting equation is expressed as ________.
A.

Assets + Liabilities = Owner’s Equity

B.

Assets – Noncurrent Assets = Liabilities

C.

Assets = Liabilities + Investments by Owners

D.

Assets = Liabilities + Owner’s Equity

9.

2.2 Which of the following decreases owner’s equity?
A.

investments by owners

B.

losses

C.

gains

D.

short-term loans

10.

2.2 Exchanges of assets for assets have what effect on equity?
A.

increase equity

B.

may have no impact on equity

C.

decrease equity

D.

There is no relationship between assets and equity.

11.

2.2 All of the following increase owner’s equity except for which one?
A.

gains

B.

investments by owners

C.

revenues

D.

acquisitions of assets by incurring liabilities

12.

2.3 Which of the following is not an element of the financial statements?
A.

future potential sales price of inventory

B.

assets

C.

liabilities

D.

equity

13.

2.3 Which of the following is the correct order of preparing the financial statements?
A.

income statement, statement of cash flows, balance sheet, statement of owner’s equity

B.

income statement, statement of owner’s equity, balance sheet, statement of cash flows

C.

income statement, balance sheet, statement of owner’s equity, statement of cash flows

D.

income statement, balance sheet, statement of cash flows, statement of owner’s equity

14.

2.3 The three heading lines of financial statements typically include which of the following?
A.

company, statement title, time period of report

B.

company headquarters, statement title, name of preparer

C.

statement title, time period of report, name of preparer

D.

name of auditor, statement title, fiscal year end

15.

2.3 Which financial statement shows the financial performance of the company on a cash basis?
A.

balance sheet

B.

statement of owner’s equity

C.

statement of cash flows

D.

income statement

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

16.

101

2.3 Which financial statement shows the financial position of the company?
A.

balance sheet

B.

statement of owner’s equity

C.

statement of cash flows

D.

income statement

17.

2.3 Working capital is an indication of the firm’s ________.
A.

asset utilization

B.

amount of noncurrent liabilities

C.

liquidity

D.

amount of noncurrent assets

Questions
1.

2.1 Identify the four financial statements and describe the purpose of each.

2.

2.1 Define the term stakeholders. Identify two stakeholder groups, and explain how each group might use

the information contained in the financial statements.
3.

2.1 Identify one similarity and one difference between revenues and gains. Why is this distinction

important to stakeholders?
4.

2.1 Identify one similarity and one difference between expenses and losses. Why is this distinction

important to stakeholders?
5.

2.1 Explain the concept of equity, and identify some activities that affect equity of a business.

6.

2.2 Explain the difference between current and noncurrent assets and liabilities. Why is this distinction

important to stakeholders?
7.

2.2 Identify/discuss one similarity and one difference between tangible and intangible assets.

8.

2.2 Name the three types of legal business structure. Describe one advantage and one disadvantage of

each.
9.

2.2 What is the “accounting equation”? List two examples of business transactions, and explain how the

accounting equation would be impacted by these transactions.
10.

2.3 Identify the order in which the four financial statements are prepared, and explain how the first

three statements are interrelated.
11.

2.3 Explain how the following items affect equity: revenue, expenses, investments by owners, and

distributions to owners.
12.

2.3 Explain the purpose of the statement of cash flows and why this statement is needed.

102

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Exercise Set A
EA1.

2.1 For each independent situation below, calculate the missing values.

EA2.

2.1 For each independent situation below, calculate the missing values for owner’s equity

EA3.

2.1 For each independent situation below, calculate the missing values.

EA4.

2.1 For each independent situation below, place an (X) by the transactions that would be included in

the statement of cash flows.

Transaction
Sold items on account
Wrote check to pay utilities
Received cash investment by owner
Recorded wages owed to employees
Received bill for advertising
Table 2.3

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Included

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

EA5.

103

2.2 For each of the following items, identify whether the item is considered current or noncurrent, and

explain why.

Item

Current or Noncurrent?

Cash
Inventory
Machines
Trademarks
Accounts Payable
Wages Payable
Owner, Capital
Accounts Receivable
Table 2.4
EA6.

2.2 For the items listed below, indicate how the item affects equity (increase, decrease, or no impact.

Item

Increase? Decrease? or No Impact?

Expenses
Assets
Gains
Liabilities
Dividends
Table 2.5
EA7.

2.2 Forest Company had the following transactions during the month of December. What is the

December 31 cash balance?

104

EA8.

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

2.2 Here are facts for the Hudson Roofing Company for December.

Assuming no investments or withdrawals, what is the ending balance in the owners’ capital account?
EA9.

2.3 Prepare an income statement using the following information for DL Enterprises for the month of

July 2018.

EA10.

2.3 Prepare a statement of owner’s equity using the information provided for Pirate Landing for the

month of October 2018.

EA11.

2.3 Prepare a balance sheet using the following information for the Ginger Company as of March 31,

2019.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

B

105

Exercise Set B

EB1.

2.1 For each independent situation below, calculate the missing values.

EB2.

2.1 For each independent situation below, calculate the missing values for Owner’s Equity.

EB3.

2.1 For each independent situation below, calculate the missing values.

EB4.

2.1 For each of the following independent situations, place an (X) by the transactions that would be

included in the statement of cash flows.

Transaction
Purchased supplies with check
Received inventory (a bill was included)
Paid cash to owner for withdrawal
Gave cash donation to local charity
Received bill for utilities
Table 2.6

Included

106

EB5.

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

2.2 For each of the following items, identify whether the item is considered current or noncurrent, and

explain why.

Item

Current or Noncurrent?

Inventory
Buildings
Accounts Receivable
Cash
Trademarks
Accounts Payable
Wages Payable
Common Stock
Table 2.7
EB6.

2.2 For the items listed below, indicate how the item affects equity (increase, decrease, or no impact).

Item

Increase? Decrease? or No Impact?

Revenues
Gains
Losses
Drawings
Investments
Table 2.8
EB7.

2.2 Gumbo Company had the following transactions during the month of December. What was the

December 1 cash balance?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

EB8.

107

2.2 Here are facts for Hailey’s Collision Service for January.

Assuming no investments or withdrawals, what is the ending balance in the owners’ capital account?
EB9.

2.3 Prepare an income statement using the following information for CK Company for the month of

February 2019.

EB10.

2.3 Prepare a statement of owner’s equity using the following information for the Can Due Shop for

the month of September 2018.

EB11.
2019.

2.3 Prepare a balance sheet using the following information for Mike’s Consulting as of January 31,

108

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

Problem Set A
PA1.

2.1 The following information is taken from the records of Baklava Bakery for the year 2019.

A.

Calculate net income or net loss for January.

B.

Calculate net income or net loss for February.

C.

Calculate net income or net loss for March.

D.

For each situation, comment on how a stakeholder might view the firm’s performance. (Hint: Think
about the source of the income or loss.)

PA2.

2.1 Each situation below relates to an independent company’s owners’ equity.

A.

Calculate the missing values.

B.

Based on your calculations, make observations about each company.

PA3.

2.1 The following information is from a new business. Comment on the year-to-year changes in the

accounts and possible sources and uses of funds (how were the funds obtained and used).

PA4.

2.1 Each of the following situations relates to a different company.

A.

For each of these independent situations, find the missing amounts.

B.

How would stakeholders view the financial performance of each company? Explain.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

PA5.

109

2.2 For each of the following independent transactions, indicate whether there was an increase, a

decrease, or no impact for each financial statement element.

Transaction

Assets

Liabilities

Owners’ Equity

Paid cash for expenses
Sold common stock for cash
Owe vendor for purchase of asset
Paid owners for dividends
Paid vendor for amount previously owed
Table 2.9
PA6.

2.2 Olivia’s Apple Orchard had the following transactions during the month of September, the first

month in business.

Complete the chart to determine the ending balances. As an example, the first transaction has been
completed. Note: Negative amounts should be indicated with minus signs (–) and unaffected should be noted
as $0.
(Hints: 1. each transaction will involve two financial statement elements; 2. the net impact of the transaction
may be $0.)
PA7.

2.2 Using the information in PA6, determine the amount of revenue and expenses for Olivia’s Apple

Orchard for the month of September.

110

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

PA8.

2.3 The following ten transactions occurred during the July grand opening of the Pancake Palace.

Assume all Retained Earnings transactions relate to the primary purpose of the business.

A.

Calculate the ending balance for each account.

B.

Create the income statement.

C.

Create the statement of owner’s equity.

D.

Create the balance sheet.

Problem Set B

B

PB1.

2.1 The following information is taken from the records of Rosebloom Flowers for the year 2019.

A.

Calculate net income or net loss for January.

B.

Calculate net income or net loss for February.

C.

Calculate net income or net loss for March.

D.

For each situation, comment on how a stakeholder might view the firm’s performance. (Hint: think
about the source of the income or loss.)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

PB2.

111

2.1 Each situation below relates to an independent company’s Owners’ Equity.

A.

Calculate the missing values.

B.

Based on your calculations, make observations about each company.

PB3.

2.1 The following information is from a new business. Comment on the year-to-year changes in the

accounts and possible sources and uses funds (how were the funds obtained and used).

PB4.

2.1 Each of the following situations relates to a different company.

A.

For each of these independent situations, find the missing amounts.

B.

How would stakeholders view the financial performance of each company? Explain.

PB5.

2.2 For each of the following independent transactions, indicate whether there was an increase,

decrease, or no impact on each financial statement element.

Transaction
Received cash for sale of asset (no gain or loss)
Cash distribution to owner
Cash sales
Investment by owners
Owe vendor for inventory purchase
Table 2.10

Assets

Liabilities

Owners’ Equity

112

PB6.

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

2.2 Mateo’s Maple Syrup had the following transactions during the month of February, its first month

in business.

Complete the chart to determine the ending balances. As an example, the first transaction has been
completed. Note: negative amounts should be indicated with minus signs (–).
(Hints: 1. each transaction will involve two financial statement elements; 2. the net impact of the transaction
may be $0.)
PB7.

2.2 Using the information in PB6, determine the amount of revenue and expenses for Mateo’s Maple

Syrup for the month of February.

Thought Provokers
TP1.

2.1 Choose three stakeholders (or stakeholder groups) for Walmart and prepare a written response

for each stakeholder. In your written response, consider the factors about the business the particular
stakeholder would be interested in. Consider the financial and any nonfinancial factors that would be relevant
to the stakeholder (or stakeholder group). Explain why these factors are important. Do some research and see
if you can find support for your points.
TP2.

2.1 Assume you purchased ten shares of Roku during the company’s IPO. Comment on why this might

be a good investment. Consider factors such as what you expect to get from your investment, why you think
Roku would become a publicly traded company, and what you think is the landscape of the industry Roku is in.
What other factors might be relevant to your decision to invest in Roku?
TP3.

2.2 A trademark is an intangible asset that has value to a business. Assume that you are an accountant

with the responsibility of valuing the trademark of a well-known company such as Nike or McDonald’s. What
makes each of these companies unique and adds value? While the value of a trademark may not necessarily
be recorded on the company’s balance sheet, discuss what factors you think would affect (increase or
decrease) the value of the company’s trademark? Consider your answer through the perspective of various
stakeholders.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

TP4.

2.3 For each of the following ten independent transactions, provide a written description of what

occurred in each transaction. Figure 2.4 might help you.

TP5.

2.3 The following historical information is from Assisi Community Markets.

Calculate the working capital and current ratio for each year. What observations do you make, and what
actions might the owner consider taking?

113

114

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statements

3

Analyzing and Recording Transactions
Figure 3.1 Dry-Cleaning Organization. Small businesses need an organized approach to recording daily
business activities. (credit: modification of “Dry cleaned clothes Unsplash” by “m0851”/Wikimedia Commons,
CC0)

Chapter Outline
3.1 Describe Principles, Assumptions, and Concepts of Accounting and Their Relationship to Financial
Statements
3.2 Define and Describe the Expanded Accounting Equation and Its Relationship to Analyzing
Transactions
3.3 Define and Describe the Initial Steps in the Accounting Cycle
3.4 Analyze Business Transactions Using the Accounting Equation and Show the Impact of Business
Transactions on Financial Statements
3.5 Use Journal Entries to Record Transactions and Post to T-Accounts
3.6 Prepare a Trial Balance

Why It Matters
Mark Summers wants to start his own dry-cleaning business upon finishing college. He has chosen to name
his business Supreme Cleaners. Before he embarks on this journey, Mark must establish what the new
business will require. He needs to determine if he wants to have anyone invest in his company. He also needs
to consider any loans that he might need to take out from his bank to fund the initial start-up. There are daily
business activities that Mark will need to keep track of, such as sales, purchasing equipment, paying bills,
collecting money from customers, and paying back investors, among other things. This process utilizes a
standard accounting framework so that the financial operations are comparable to other company’s financial
operations.

116

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

He knows it is important for him to keep thorough documentation of these business activities to give his
investors and creditors, and himself, a clear and accurate picture of operations. Without this, he may find it
difficult to stay in business. He will maintain an organized record of all of Supreme Cleaners’ financial activities
from their inception, using an accounting process meant to result in accurate financial statement preparation.
3.1

Describe Principles, Assumptions, and Concepts of Accounting and

Their Relationship to Financial Statements
If you want to start your own business, you need to maintain detailed and accurate records of business
performance in order for you, your investors, and your lenders, to make informed decisions about the future
of your company. Financial statements are created with this purpose in mind. A set of financial statements
includes the income statement, statement of owner’s equity, balance sheet, and statement of cash flows.
These statements are discussed in detail in Introduction to Financial Statements. This chapter explains the
relationship between financial statements and several steps in the accounting process. We go into much more
detail in The Adjustment Process and Completing the Accounting Cycle.

Accounting Principles, Assumptions, and Concepts
In Introduction to Financial Statements, you learned that the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) is
an independent, nonprofit organization that sets the standards for financial accounting and reporting,
including generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), for both public- and private-sector businesses in
the United States.
As you may also recall, GAAP are the concepts, standards, and rules that guide the preparation and
presentation of financial statements. If US accounting rules are followed, the accounting rules are called US
GAAP. International accounting rules are called International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Publicly
traded companies (those that offer their shares for sale on exchanges in the United States) have the reporting
of their financial operations regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
You also learned that the SEC is an independent federal agency that is charged with protecting the interests of
investors, regulating stock markets, and ensuring companies adhere to GAAP requirements. By having proper
accounting standards such as US GAAP or IFRS, information presented publicly is considered comparable and
reliable. As a result, financial statement users are more informed when making decisions. The SEC not only
enforces the accounting rules but also delegates the process of setting standards for US GAAP to the FASB.
Some companies that operate on a global scale may be able to report their financial statements using IFRS.
The SEC regulates the financial reporting of companies selling their shares in the United States, whether US
GAAP or IFRS are used. The basics of accounting discussed in this chapter are the same under either set of
guidelines.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Auditing of Publicly Traded Companies
When a publicly traded company in the United States issues its financial statements, the financial

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

117

statements have been audited by a Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) approved
auditor. The PCAOB is the organization that sets the auditing standards, after approval by the SEC. It is
important to remember that auditing is not the same as accounting. The role of the Auditor is to examine
and provide assurance that financial statements are reasonably stated under the rules of appropriate
accounting principles. The auditor conducts the audit under a set of standards known as Generally
Accepted Auditing Standards. The accounting department of a company and its auditors are employees
of two different companies. The auditors of a company are required to be employed by a different
company so that there is independence.
The nonprofit Center for Audit Quality explains auditor independence: “Auditors’ independence from
company management is essential for a successful audit because it enables them to approach the audit
with the necessary professional skepticism.”

[1]

The center goes on to identify a key practice to protect

independence by which an external auditor reports not to a company’s management, which could make
it more difficult to maintain independence, but to a company’s audit committee. The audit committee
oversees the auditors’ work and monitors disagreements between management and the auditor about
financial reporting. Internal auditors of a company are not the auditors that provide an opinion on the
financial statements of a company. According to the Center for Audit Quality, “By law, public companies’
annual financial statements are audited each year by independent auditors—accountants who examine
the data for conformity with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP).”

[2]

The opinion from

the independent auditors regarding a publicly traded company is filed for public inspection, along with
the financial statements of the publicly traded company.

The Conceptual Framework
The FASB uses a conceptual framework, which is a set of concepts that guide financial reporting. These
concepts can help ensure information is comparable and reliable to stakeholders. Guidance may be given on
how to report transactions, measurement requirements, and application on financial statements, among other
things.

[3]

IFRS CONNECTION
GAAP, IFRS, and the Conceptual Framework
The procedural part of accounting—recording transactions right through to creating financial
statements—is a universal process. Businesses all around the world carry out this process as part of their
normal operations. In carrying out these steps, the timing and rate at which transactions are recorded
and subsequently reported in the financial statements are determined by the accepted accounting
principles used by the company.

1
2
3

Center for Audit Quality. Guide to Public Company Auditing. https://www.iasplus.com/en/binary/usa/aicpa/0905caqauditguide.pdf
Center for Audit Quality. Guide to Public Company Auditing. https://www.iasplus.com/en/binary/usa/aicpa/0905caqauditguide.pdf
Financial Accounting Standards Board. “The Conceptual Framework.” http://www.fasb.org/jsp/FASB/Page/BridgePage&cid=1176168367774

118

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

As you learned in Role of Accounting in Society, US-based companies will apply US GAAP as created by
the FASB, and most international companies will apply IFRS as created by the International Accounting
Standards Board (IASB). As illustrated in this chapter, the starting point for either FASB or IASB in
creating accounting standards, or principles, is the conceptual framework. Both FASB and IASB cover the
same topics in their frameworks, and the two frameworks are similar. The conceptual framework helps in
the standard-setting process by creating the foundation on which those standards should be based. It
can also help companies figure out how to record transactions for which there may not currently be an
applicable standard. Though there are many similarities between the conceptual framework under US
GAAP and IFRS, these similar foundations result in different standards and/or different interpretations.
Once an accounting standard has been written for US GAAP, the FASB often offers clarification on how
the standard should be applied. Businesses frequently ask for guidance for their particular industry.
When the FASB creates accounting standards and any subsequent clarifications or guidance, it only has
to consider the effects of those standards, clarifications, or guidance on US-based companies. This
means that FASB has only one major legal system and government to consider. When offering
interpretations or other guidance on application of standards, the FASB can utilize knowledge of the USbased legal and taxation systems to help guide their points of clarification and can even create
interpretations for specific industries. This means that interpretation and guidance on US GAAP
standards can often contain specific details and guidelines in order to help align the accounting process
with legal matters and tax laws.
In applying their conceptual framework to create standards, the IASB must consider that their standards
are being used in 120 or more different countries, each with its own legal and judicial systems. Therefore,
it is much more difficult for the IASB to provide as much detailed guidance once the standard has been
written, because what might work in one country from a taxation or legal standpoint might not be
appropriate in a different country. This means that IFRS interpretations and guidance have fewer
detailed components for specific industries as compared to US GAAP guidance.

The conceptual framework sets the basis for accounting standards set by rule-making bodies that govern how
the financial statements are prepared. Here are a few of the principles, assumptions, and concepts that
provide guidance in developing GAAP.

Revenue Recognition Principle
The revenue recognition principle directs a company to recognize revenue in the period in which it is earned;
revenue is not considered earned until a product or service has been provided. This means the period of time
in which you performed the service or gave the customer the product is the period in which revenue is
recognized.
There also does not have to be a correlation between when cash is collected and when revenue is recognized.
A customer may not pay for the service on the day it was provided. Even though the customer has not yet paid
cash, there is a reasonable expectation that the customer will pay in the future. Since the company has
provided the service, it would recognize the revenue as earned, even though cash has yet to be collected.
For example, Lynn Sanders owns a small printing company, Printing Plus. She completed a print job for a
customer on August 10. The customer did not pay cash for the service at that time and was billed for the
service, paying at a later date. When should Lynn recognize the revenue, on August 10 or at the later payment

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

119

date? Lynn should record revenue as earned on August 10. She provided the service to the customer, and
there is a reasonable expectation that the customer will pay at the later date.

Expense Recognition (Matching) Principle
The expense recognition principle (also referred to as the matching principle) states that we must match
expenses with associated revenues in the period in which the revenues were earned. A mismatch in expenses
and revenues could be an understated net income in one period with an overstated net income in another
period. There would be no reliability in statements if expenses were recorded separately from the revenues
generated.
For example, if Lynn earned printing revenue in April, then any associated expenses to the revenue generation
(such as paying an employee) should be recorded on the same income statement. The employee worked for
Lynn in April, helping her earn revenue in April, so Lynn must match the expense with the revenue by showing
both on the April income statement.

Cost Principle
The cost principle, also known as the historical cost principle, states that virtually everything the company
owns or controls (assets) must be recorded at its value at the date of acquisition. For most assets, this value is
easy to determine as it is the price agreed to when buying the asset from the vendor. There are some
exceptions to this rule, but always apply the cost principle unless FASB has specifically stated that a different
valuation method should be used in a given circumstance.
The primary exceptions to this historical cost treatment, at this time, are financial instruments, such as stocks
and bonds, which might be recorded at their fair market value. This is called mark-to-market accounting or fair
value accounting and is more advanced than the general basic concepts underlying the introduction to basic
accounting concepts; therefore, it is addressed in more advanced accounting courses.
Once an asset is recorded on the books, the value of that asset must remain at its historical cost, even if its
value in the market changes. For example, Lynn Sanders purchases a piece of equipment for $40,000. She
believes this is a bargain and perceives the value to be more at $60,000 in the current market. Even though
Lynn feels the equipment is worth $60,000, she may only record the cost she paid for the equipment of
$40,000.

Full Disclosure Principle
The full disclosure principle states that a business must report any business activities that could affect what
is reported on the financial statements. These activities could be nonfinancial in nature or be supplemental
details not readily available on the main financial statement. Some examples of this include any pending
litigation, acquisition information, methods used to calculate certain figures, or stock options. These
disclosures are usually recorded in footnotes on the statements, or in addenda to the statements.

Separate Entity Concept
The separate entity concept prescribes that a business may only report activities on financial statements that
are specifically related to company operations, not those activities that affect the owner personally. This
concept is called the separate entity concept because the business is considered an entity separate and apart
from its owner(s).

120

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

For example, Lynn Sanders purchases two cars; one is used for personal use only, and the other is used for
business use only. According to the separate entity concept, Lynn may record the purchase of the car used by
the company in the company’s accounting records, but not the car for personal use.

Conservatism
This concept is important when valuing a transaction for which the dollar value cannot be as clearly
determined, as when using the cost principle. Conservatism states that if there is uncertainty in a potential
financial estimate, a company should err on the side of caution and report the most conservative amount. This
would mean that any uncertain or estimated expenses/losses should be recorded, but uncertain or estimated
revenues/gains should not. This understates net income, therefore reducing profit. This gives stakeholders a
more reliable view of the company’s financial position and does not overstate income.

Monetary Measurement Concept
In order to record a transaction, we need a system of monetary measurement, or a monetary unit by which to
value the transaction. In the United States, this monetary unit is the US dollar. Without a dollar amount, it
would be impossible to record information in the financial records. It also would leave stakeholders unable to
make financial decisions, because there is no comparability measurement between companies. This concept
ignores any change in the purchasing power of the dollar due to inflation.

Going Concern Assumption
The going concern assumption assumes a business will continue to operate in the foreseeable future. A
common time frame might be twelve months. However, one should presume the business is doing well
enough to continue operations unless there is evidence to the contrary. For example, a business might have
certain expenses that are paid off (or reduced) over several time periods. If the business will stay operational
in the foreseeable future, the company can continue to recognize these long-term expenses over several time
periods. Some red flags that a business may no longer be a going concern are defaults on loans or a sequence
of losses.

Time Period Assumption
The time period assumption states that a company can present useful information in shorter time periods,
such as years, quarters, or months. The information is broken into time frames to make comparisons and
evaluations easier. The information will be timely and current and will give a meaningful picture of how the
company is operating.
For example, a school year is broken down into semesters or quarters. After each semester or quarter, your
grade point average (GPA) is updated with new information on your performance in classes you completed.
This gives you timely grading information with which to make decisions about your schooling.
A potential or existing investor wants timely information by which to measure the performance of the
company, and to help decide whether to invest. Because of the time period assumption, we need to be sure to
recognize revenues and expenses in the proper period. This might mean allocating costs over more than one
accounting or reporting period.
The use of the principles, assumptions, and concepts in relation to the preparation of financial statements is
better understood when looking at the full accounting cycle and its relation to the detailed process required to
record business activities (Figure 3.2).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Figure 3.2

121

GAAP Accounting Standards Connection Tree. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
In 2017, the US government enacted the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. As a result, financial stakeholders needed
to resolve several issues surrounding the standards from GAAP principles and the FASB. The issues were
as follows: “Current Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) requires that deferred tax liabilities
and assets be adjusted for the effect of a change in tax laws or rates,” and “implementation issues
related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and income tax reporting.”

[4]

In response, the FASB issued updated guidance on both issues. You can explore these revised guidelines
at the FASB website (https://www.fasb.org/taxcutsjobsact#section_1).

The Accounting Equation
Introduction to Financial Statements briefly discussed the accounting equation, which is important to the
study of accounting because it shows what the organization owns and the sources of (or claims against) those
resources. The accounting equation is expressed as follows:

4

Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). “Accounting for the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.” https://www.fasb.org/taxcutsjobsact#section_1

122

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Recall that the accounting equation can be thought of from a “sources and claims” perspective; that is, the
assets (items owned by the organization) were obtained by incurring liabilities or were provided by owners.
Stated differently, everything a company owns must equal everything the company owes to creditors (lenders)
and owners (individuals for sole proprietors or stockholders for companies or corporations).
In our example in Why It Matters, we used an individual owner, Mark Summers, for the Supreme Cleaners
discussion to simplify our example. Individual owners are sole proprietors in legal terms. This distinction
becomes significant in such areas as legal liability and tax compliance. For sole proprietors, the owner’s
interest is labeled “owner’s equity.”
In Introduction to Financial Statements, we addressed the owner’s value in the firm as capital or owner’s equity.
This assumed that the business is a sole proprietorship. However, for the rest of the text we switch the
structure of the business to a corporation, and instead of owner’s equity, we begin using stockholder’s equity,
which includes account titles such as common stock and retained earnings to represent the owners’ interests.
The primary reason for this distinction is that the typical company can have several to thousands of owners,
and the financial statements for corporations require a greater amount of complexity.
As you also learned in Introduction to Financial Statements, the accounting equation represents the balance
sheet and shows the relationship between assets, liabilities, and owners’ equity (for sole proprietorships/
individuals) or common stock (for companies).
You may recall from mathematics courses that an equation must always be in balance. Therefore, we must
ensure that the two sides of the accounting equation are always equal. We explore the components of the
accounting equation in more detail shortly. First, we need to examine several underlying concepts that form
the foundation for the accounting equation: the double-entry accounting system, debits and credits, and the
“normal” balance for each account that is part of a formal accounting system.

Double-Entry Bookkeeping
The basic components of even the simplest accounting system are accounts and a general ledger. An account is
a record showing increases and decreases to assets, liabilities, and equity—the basic components found in the
accounting equation. As you know from Introduction to Financial Statements, each of these categories, in turn,
includes many individual accounts, all of which a company maintains in its general ledger. A general ledger is
a comprehensive listing of all of a company’s accounts with their individual balances.
Accounting is based on what we call a double-entry accounting system, which requires the following:
• Each time we record a transaction, we must record a change in at least two different accounts. Having two
or more accounts change will allow us to keep the accounting equation in balance.
• Not only will at least two accounts change, but there must also be at least one debit and one credit side
impacted.
• The sum of the debits must equal the sum of the credits for each transaction.
In order for companies to record the myriad of transactions they have each year, there is a need for a simple
but detailed system. Journals are useful tools to meet this need.

Debits and Credits
Each account can be represented visually by splitting the account into left and right sides as shown. This
graphic representation of a general ledger account is known as a T-account. The concept of the T-account was

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

123

briefly mentioned in Introduction to Financial Statements and will be used later in this chapter to analyze
transactions. A T-account is called a “T-account” because it looks like a “T,” as you can see with the T-account
shown here.

A debit records financial information on the left side of each account. A credit records financial information on
the right side of an account. One side of each account will increase and the other side will decrease. The
ending account balance is found by calculating the difference between debits and credits for each account.
You will often see the terms debit and credit represented in shorthand, written as DR or dr and CR or cr,
respectively. Depending on the account type, the sides that increase and decrease may vary. We can illustrate
each account type and its corresponding debit and credit effects in the form of an expanded accounting
equation. You will learn more about the expanded accounting equation and use it to analyze transactions in
Define and Describe the Expanded Accounting Equation and Its Relationship to Analyzing Transactions.

As we can see from this expanded accounting equation, Assets accounts increase on the debit side and
decrease on the credit side. This is also true of Dividends and Expenses accounts. Liabilities increase on the
credit side and decrease on the debit side. This is also true of Common Stock and Revenues accounts. This
becomes easier to understand as you become familiar with the normal balance of an account.

Normal Balance of an Account
The normal balance is the expected balance each account type maintains, which is the side that increases. As
assets and expenses increase on the debit side, their normal balance is a debit. Dividends paid to shareholders
also have a normal balance that is a debit entry. Since liabilities, equity (such as common stock), and revenues
increase with a credit, their “normal” balance is a credit. Table 3.1 shows the normal balances and increases
for each account type.
Account Normal Balances and Increases
Type of account

Increases with

Normal balance

Asset

Debit

Debit

Liability

Credit

Credit

Common Stock

Credit

Credit

Dividends

Debit

Debit

Table 3.1

124

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Account Normal Balances and Increases
Type of account

Increases with

Normal balance

Revenue

Credit

Credit

Expense

Debit

Debit

Table 3.1
When an account produces a balance that is contrary to what the expected normal balance of that account is,
this account has an abnormal balance. Let’s consider the following example to better understand abnormal
balances.
Let’s say there were a credit of $4,000 and a debit of $6,000 in the Accounts Payable account. Since Accounts
Payable increases on the credit side, one would expect a normal balance on the credit side. However, the
difference between the two figures in this case would be a debit balance of $2,000, which is an abnormal
balance. This situation could possibly occur with an overpayment to a supplier or an error in recording.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Assets
We define an asset to be a resource that a company owns that has an economic value. We also know that
the employment activities performed by an employee of a company are considered an expense, in this
case a salary expense. In baseball, and other sports around the world, players’ contracts are consistently
categorized as assets that lose value over time (they are amortized).
For example, the Texas Rangers list “Player rights contracts and signing bonuses-net” as an asset on its
balance sheet. They decrease this asset’s value over time through a process called amortization. For tax
purposes, players’ contracts are treated akin to office equipment even though expenses for player
salaries and bonuses have already been recorded. This can be a point of contention for some who argue
that an owner does not assume the lost value of a player’s contract, the player does.

3.2

[5]

Define and Describe the Expanded Accounting Equation and Its

Relationship to Analyzing Transactions
Before we explore how to analyze transactions, we first need to understand what governs the way
transactions are recorded.
As you have learned, the accounting equation represents the idea that a company needs assets to operate,
and there are two major sources that contribute to operations: liabilities and equity. The company borrows the
funds, creating liabilities, or the company can take the funds provided by the profits generated in the current
or past periods, creating retained earnings or some other form of stockholder’s equity. Recall the accounting
5 Tommy Craggs. “MLB Confidential, Part 3: Texas Rangers.” Deadspin. August 24, 2010. https://deadspin.com/5619951/mlb-confidentialpart-3-texas-rangers

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

125

equation’s basic form.

Expanded Accounting Equation
The expanded accounting equation breaks down the equity portion of the accounting equation into more
detail. This expansion of the equity section allows a company to see the impact to equity from changes to
revenues and expenses, and to owner investments and payouts. It is important to have more detail in this
equity category to understand the effect on financial statements from period to period. For example, an
increase to revenue can increase net income on the income statement, increase retained earnings on the
statement of retained earnings, and change the distribution of stockholder’s equity on the balance sheet. This
may be difficult to understand where these changes have occurred without revenue recognized individually in
this expanded equation.
The expanded accounting equation is shown here.

Figure 3.3

Expanded Accounting Equation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-

NC-SA 4.0 license)
Note that this expanded accounting equation breaks down Equity into four categories: common stock,
dividends, revenues, and expenses. This considers each element of contributed capital and retained earnings
individually to better illustrate each one’s impact on changes in equity.
A business can now use this equation to analyze transactions in more detail. But first, it may help to examine
the many accounts that can fall under each of the main categories of Assets, Liabilities, and Equity, in terms of
their relationship to the expanded accounting equation. We can begin this discussion by looking at the chart of
accounts.

Chart of Accounts
Recall that the basic components of even the simplest accounting system are accounts and a general ledger.
Accounts shows all the changes made to assets, liabilities, and equity—the three main categories in the
accounting equation. Each of these categories, in turn, includes many individual accounts, all of which a
company maintains in its general ledger.

126

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

When a company first starts the analysis process, it will make a list of all the accounts used in day-to-day
transactions. For example, a company may have accounts such as cash, accounts receivable, supplies,
accounts payable, unearned revenues, common stock, dividends, revenues, and expenses. Each company will
make a list that works for its business type, and the transactions it expects to engage in. The accounts may
receive numbers using the system presented in Table 3.2.
Account Numbering System
Account

Assigned account number

Account numbers for a

Account numbers for a

category

will start with

small company

large company

Assets

1

100–199

1000–1999

Liabilities

2

200–299

2000–2999

Stockholders’

3

300–399

3000–3999

Revenues

4

400–499

4000–4999

Expenses

5

500–599

5000–5999

equity

Table 3.2
We call this account numbering system a chart of accounts. The accounts are presented in the chart of
accounts in the order in which they appear on the financial statements, beginning with the balance sheet
accounts and then the income statement accounts. Additional numbers starting with six and continuing might
be used in large merchandising and manufacturing companies. The information in the chart of accounts is the
foundation of a well-organized accounting system.

Breaking Down the Expanded Accounting Equation
Refer to the expanded accounting equation (Figure 3.3). We begin with the left side of the equation, the assets,
and work toward the right side of the equation to liabilities and equity.

Assets and the Expanded Accounting Equation
On the left side of the equation are assets. Assets are resources a company owns that have an economic value.
Assets are represented on the balance sheet financial statement. Some common examples of assets are cash,
accounts receivable, inventory, supplies, prepaid expenses, notes receivable, equipment, buildings, machinery,
and land.
Cash includes paper currency as well as coins, checks, bank accounts, and money orders. Anything that can be
quickly liquidated into cash is considered cash. Cash activities are a large part of any business, and the flow of
cash in and out of the company is reported on the statement of cash flows.
Accounts receivable is money that is owed to the company, usually from a customer. The customer has not yet
paid with cash for the provided good or service but will do so in the future. Common phrasing to describe this
situation is that a customer purchased something “on account,” meaning that the customer has asked to be

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

127

billed and will pay at a later date: “Account” because a customer has not paid us yet but instead has asked to
be billed; “Receivable” because we will receive the money in the future.
Inventory refers to the goods available for sale. Service companies do not have goods for sale and would thus
not have inventory. Merchandising and manufacturing businesses do have inventory. You learn more about
this topic in Inventory.
Examples of supplies (office supplies) include pens, paper, and pencils. Supplies are considered assets until an
employee uses them. At the point they are used, they no longer have an economic value to the organization,
and their cost is now an expense to the business.
Prepaid expenses are items paid for in advance of their use. They are considered assets until used. Some
examples can include insurance and rent. Insurance, for example, is usually purchased for more than one
month at a time (six months typically). The company does not use all six months of the insurance at once, it
uses it one month at a time. However, the company prepays for all of it up front. As each month passes, the
company will adjust its records to reflect the cost of one month of insurance usage.
Notes receivable is similar to accounts receivable in that it is money owed to the company by a customer or
other entity. The difference here is that a note typically includes interest and specific contract terms, and the
amount may be due in more than one accounting period.
Equipment examples include desks, chairs, and computers; anything that has a long-term value to the
company that is used in the office. Equipment is considered a long-term asset, meaning you can use it for
more than one accounting period (a year for example). Equipment will lose value over time, in a process called
depreciation. You will learn more about this topic in The Adjustment Process.
Buildings, machinery, and land are all considered long-term assets. Machinery is usually specific to a
manufacturing company that has a factory producing goods. Machinery and buildings also depreciate. Unlike
other long-term assets such as machinery, buildings, and equipment, land is not depreciated. The process to
calculate the loss on land value could be very cumbersome, speculative, and unreliable; therefore, the
treatment in accounting is for land to not be depreciated over time.

128

Figure 3.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Assets. Cash, buildings, inventory, and equipment are all types of assets. (credit clockwise from

top left: modification of “Cash money! 140606-A-CA521-021” by Sgt. Michael Selvage/Wikimedia Commons,
Public Domain; modification of “41 Cherry Orchard Road” by “Pafcool2”/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain;
modification of “ASM-e1516805109201” by Jeff Green, Rethink Robotics/ Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 4.0;
modification of “Gfp-inventory-space” by Yinan Chen/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

Liabilities and the Expanded Accounting Equation
The accounting equation emphasizes a basic idea in business; that is, businesses need assets in order to
operate. There are two ways a business can finance the purchase of assets. First, it can sell shares of its stock
to the public to raise money to purchase the assets, or it can use profits earned by the business to finance its
activities. Second, it can borrow the money from a lender such as a financial institution. You will learn about
other assets as you progress through the book. Let’s now take a look at the right side of the accounting
equation.
Liabilities are obligations to pay an amount owed to a lender (creditor) based on a past transaction. Liabilities
are reported on the balance sheet. It is important to understand that when we talk about liabilities, we are not
just talking about loans. Money collected for gift cards, subscriptions, or as advance deposits from customers
could also be liabilities. Essentially, anything a company owes and has yet to pay within a period is considered
a liability, such as salaries, utilities, and taxes.
For example, a company uses $400 worth of utilities in May but is not billed for the usage, or asked to pay for
the usage, until June. Even though the company does not have to pay the bill until June, the company owed
money for the usage that occurred in May. Therefore, the company must record the usage of electricity, as
well as the liability to pay the utility bill, in May.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

129

Eventually that debt must be repaid by performing the service, fulfilling the subscription, or providing an asset
such as merchandise or cash. Some common examples of liabilities include accounts payable, notes payable,
and unearned revenue.
Accounts payable recognizes that the company owes money and has not paid. Remember, when a customer
purchases something “on account” it means the customer has asked to be billed and will pay at a later date. In
this case the purchasing company is the “customer.” The company will have to pay the money due in the
future, so we use the word “payable.” The debt owed is usually paid off in less than one accounting period
(less than a year typically) if it is classified as an account payable.
A notes payable is similar to accounts payable in that the company owes money and has not yet paid. Some
key differences are that the contract terms are usually longer than one accounting period, interest is included,
and there is typically a more formalized contract that dictates the terms of the transaction.
Unearned revenue represents a customer’s advanced payment for a product or service that has yet to be
provided by the company. Since the company has not yet provided the product or service, it cannot recognize
the customer’s payment as revenue, according to the revenue recognition principle. Thus, the account is called
unearned revenue. The company owing the product or service creates the liability to the customer.

Equity and the Expanded Accounting Equation
Stockholder’s equity refers to the owner’s (stockholders) investments in the business and earnings. These
two components are contributed capital and retained earnings.
The owner’s investments in the business typically come in the form of common stock and are called
contributed capital. There is a hybrid owner’s investment labeled as preferred stock that is a combination of
debt and equity (a concept covered in more advanced accounting courses). The company will issue shares of
common stock to represent stockholder ownership. You will learn more about common stock in Corporation
Accounting.
Another component of stockholder’s equity is company earnings. These retained earnings are what the
company holds onto at the end of a period to reinvest in the business, after any distributions to ownership
occur. Stated more technically, retained earnings are a company’s cumulative earnings since the creation of
the company minus any dividends that it has declared or paid since its creation. One tricky point to remember
is that retained earnings are not classified as assets. Instead, they are a component of the stockholder’s equity
account, placing it on the right side of the accounting equation.
Distribution of earnings to ownership is called a dividend. The dividend could be paid with cash or be a
distribution of more company stock to current shareholders. Either way, dividends will decrease retained
earnings.
Also affecting retained earnings are revenues and expenses, by way of net income or net loss. Revenues are
earnings from the sale of goods and services. An increase in revenues will also contribute toward an increase
in retained earnings. Expenses are the cost of resources associated with earning revenues. An increase to
expenses will contribute toward a decrease in retained earnings. Recall that this concept of recognizing
expenses associated with revenues is the expense recognition principle. Some examples of expenses include
bill payments for utilities, employee salaries, and loan interest expense. A business does not have an expense
until it is “incurred.” Incurred means the resource is used or consumed. For example, you will not recognize
utilities as an expense until you have used the utilities. The difference between revenues earned and expenses
incurred is called net income (loss) and can be found on the income statement.

130

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Net income reported on the income statement flows into the statement of retained earnings. If a business has
net income (earnings) for the period, then this will increase its retained earnings for the period. This means
that revenues exceeded expenses for the period, thus increasing retained earnings. If a business has net loss
for the period, this decreases retained earnings for the period. This means that the expenses exceeded the
revenues for the period, thus decreasing retained earnings.
You will notice that stockholder’s equity increases with common stock issuance and revenues, and decreases
from dividend payouts and expenses. Stockholder’s equity is reported on the balance sheet in the form of
contributed capital (common stock) and retained earnings. The statement of retained earnings computes the
retained earnings balance at the beginning of the period, adds net income or subtracts net loss from the
income statement, and subtracts dividends declared, to result in an ending retained earnings balance
reported on the balance sheet.
Now that you have a basic understanding of the accounting equation, and examples of assets, liabilities, and
stockholder’s equity, you will be able to analyze the many transactions a business may encounter and
determine how each transaction affects the accounting equation and corresponding financial statements.
First, however, in Define and Examine the Initial Steps in the Accounting Cycle we look at how the role of
identifying and analyzing transactions fits into the continuous process known as the accounting cycle.

LINK TO LEARNING
The Financial Accounting Standards Board had a policy that allowed companies to reduce their tax
liability from share-based compensation deductions. This led companies to create what some call the
“contentious debit,” to defer tax liability and increase tax expense in a current period. See the article
“The contentious debit—seriously” on continuous debt (https://openstax.org/l/50ContDebt) for further
discussion of this practice.

3.3

Define and Describe the Initial Steps in the Accounting Cycle

This chapter on analyzing and recording transactions is the first of three consecutive chapters (including The
Adjustment Process and Completing the Accounting Cycle) covering the steps in one continuous process
known as the accounting cycle. The accounting cycle is a step-by-step process to record business activities
and events to keep financial records up to date. The process occurs over one accounting period and will begin
the cycle again in the following period. A period is one operating cycle of a business, which could be a month,
quarter, or year. Review the accounting cycle in Figure 3.5.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Figure 3.5

131

The Accounting Cycle. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)
As you can see, the cycle begins with identifying and analyzing transactions, and culminates in reversing
entries (which we do not cover in this textbook). The entire cycle is meant to keep financial data organized and
easily accessible to both internal and external users of information. In this chapter, we focus on the first four
steps in the accounting cycle: identify and analyze transactions, record transactions to a journal, post journal
information to a ledger, and prepare an unadjusted trial balance.
In The Adjustment Process we review steps 5, 6, and 7 in the accounting cycle: record adjusting entries,
prepare an adjusted trial balance, and prepare financial statements. In Completing the Accounting Cycle, we
review steps 8 and 9: closing entries and prepare a post-closing trial balance. As stated previously, we do not
cover reversing entries.

132

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Turning Hacked Gift Card Accounts into Cash
Gift cards are a great way for a company to presell its products and to create cash flow. One of the
problems with gift cards is that fraudsters are using the retailer’s weak internal controls to defraud the
retailer’s customers. A fraudster can hack into autoloading gift cards and drain a customer’s bank
account by buying new, physical gift cards through the autoloading gift card account. This is a real
problem, and an internal control to reduce this type of fraud is to use a double verification system for the
transfer of money from a bank account to reloadable gift card account. Accountants can help their
organization limit gift card fraud by reviewing their company’s internal controls over the gift card
process.
A simple explanation of this fraud is that a fraudster will gain access to an individual’s email account
through phishing or by other means, such as a fraudster putting a key logger on a public computer or in
a corrupted public Wi-Fi. The individual uses the same password for the reloadable gift card as his or her
email account, and the fraudster will see emails about the gift card. The fraudster contacts the retailor
posing as the individual, and the retailor creates an in-store gift card redemption code, and the fraudster
or his or her accomplice will go to the store posing as the individual and buy physical gift cards with the
redemption code. The customer’s bank account will be drained, and the customer will be upset. In
another gift card fraud, the individual’s credit card is stolen and used to buy physical gift cards from a
retailor. This type of fraud causes problems for the retailer, for the retailer’s reputation is damaged
through the implementation of poor internal controls.
Does the fraudster use the fraudulently acquired gift cards? No, there is an entire market for selling gift
cards on Craigslist, just go look and see how easy it is to buy discounted gift cards on Craigslist. Also,
there are companies such as cardcash.com and cardhub.com that buy and resell gift cards. The fraudster
just sells the gift cards, and the retailer has no idea it is redeeming fraudulently acquired gift cards.
Through the implementation of proper internal controls, the accountant can help limit this fraud and
protect his or her employer’s reputation.

First Four Steps in the Accounting Cycle
The first four steps in the accounting cycle are (1) identify and analyze transactions, (2) record transactions to a
journal, (3) post journal information to a ledger, and (4) prepare an unadjusted trial balance. We begin by
introducing the steps and their related documentation.

Figure 3.6

Accounting Cycle. The first four steps in the accounting cycle. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
These first four steps set the foundation for the recording process.
Step 1. Identifying and analyzing transactions is the first step in the process. This takes information from

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

133

original sources or activities and translates that information into usable financial data. An original source is a
traceable record of information that contributes to the creation of a business transaction. For example, a sales
invoice is considered an original source. Activities would include paying an employee, selling products,
providing a service, collecting cash, borrowing money, and issuing stock to company owners. Once the original
source has been identified, the company will analyze the information to see how it influences financial records.
Let’s say that Mark Summers of Supreme Cleaners (from Why It Matters) provides cleaning services to a
customer. He generates an invoice for $200, the amount the customer owes, so he can be paid for the service.
This sales receipt contains information such as how much the customer owes, payment terms, and dates. This
sales receipt is an original source containing financial information that creates a business transaction for the
company.
Step 2. The second step in the process is recording transactions to a journal. This takes analyzed data from
step 1 and organizes it into a comprehensive record of every company transaction. A transaction is a business
activity or event that has an effect on financial information presented on financial statements. The information
to record a transaction comes from an original source. A journal (also known as the book of original entry or
general journal) is a record of all transactions.
For example, in the previous transaction, Supreme Cleaners had the invoice for $200. Mark Summers needs to
record this $200 in his financial records. He needs to choose what accounts represent this transaction, whether
or not this transaction will increase or decreases the accounts, and how that impacts the accounting equation
before he can record the transaction in his journal. He needs to do this process for every transaction occurring
during the period.
Figure 3.7 includes information such as the date of the transaction, the accounts required in the journal entry,
and columns for debits and credits.

Figure 3.7

General Journal. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Step 3. The third step in the process is posting journal information to a ledger. Posting takes all transactions
from the journal during a period and moves the information to a general ledger, or ledger. As you’ve learned,
account balances can be represented visually in the form of T-accounts.
Returning to Supreme Cleaners, Mark identified the accounts needed to represent the $200 sale and recorded
them in his journal. He will then take the account information and move it to his general ledger. All of the
accounts he used during the period will be shown on the general ledger, not only those accounts impacted by
the $200 sale.

134

Figure 3.8

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

General Ledger in T-Account Form. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC

BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Step 4. The fourth step in the process is to prepare an unadjusted trial balance. This step takes information
from the general ledger and transfers it onto a document showing all account balances, and ensuring that
debits and credits for the period balance (debit and credit totals are equal).
Mark Summers from Supreme Cleaners needs to organize all of his accounts and their balances, including the
$200 sale, onto a trial balance. He also needs to ensure his debits and credits are balanced at the culmination
of this step.

Figure 3.9

Unadjusted Trial Balance. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA

4.0 license)
It is important to note that recording the entire process requires a strong attention to detail. Any mistakes
early on in the process can lead to incorrect reporting information on financial statements. If this occurs,
accountants may have to go all the way back to the beginning of the process to find their error. Make sure that
as you complete each step, you are careful and really take the time to understand how to record information
and why you are recording it. In the next section, you will learn how the accounting equation is used to analyze
transactions.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

135

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Forensic Accounting
Ever dream about working for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)? As a forensic accountant, that
dream might just be possible. A forensic accountant investigates financial crimes, such as tax evasion,
insider trading, and embezzlement, among other things. Forensic accountants review financial records
looking for clues to bring about charges against potential criminals. They consider every part of the
accounting cycle, including original source documents, looking through journal entries, general ledgers,
and financial statements. They may even be asked to testify to their findings in a court of law.
To be a successful forensic accountant, one must be detailed, organized, and naturally inquisitive. This
position will need to retrace the steps a suspect may have taken to cover up fraudulent financial
activities. Understanding how a company operates can help identify fraudulent activities that veer from
the company’s position. Some of the best forensic accountants have put away major criminals such as Al
Capone, Bernie Madoff, Ken Lay, and Ivan Boesky.

LINK TO LEARNING
A tool that can be helpful to businesses looking for an easier way to view their accounting processes is to
have drillable financial statements. This feature can be found in several software systems, allowing
companies to go through the accounting cycle from transaction entry to financial statement
construction. Read this Journal of Accountancy column on drillable financial statements
(https://openstax.org/l/50DrillFinState) to learn more.

3.4

Analyze Business Transactions Using the Accounting Equation and Show

the Impact of Business Transactions on Financial Statements
You gained a basic understanding of both the basic and expanded accounting equations, and looked at
examples of assets, liabilities, and stockholder’s equity in Define and Examine the Expanded Accounting
Equation and Its Relationship to Analyzing Transactions. Now, we can consider some of the transactions a
business may encounter. We can review how each transaction would affect the basic accounting equation and
the corresponding financial statements.
As discussed in Define and Examine the Initial Steps in the Accounting Cycle, the first step in the accounting
cycle is to identify and analyze transactions. Each original source must be evaluated for financial implications.
Meaning, will the information contained on this original source affect the financial statements? If the answer is
yes, the company will then analyze the information for how it affects the financial statements. For example, if a
company receives a cash payment from a customer, the company needs to know how to record the cash
payment in a meaningful way to keep its financial statements up to date.

136

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

YOUR TURN
Monetary Value of Transactions
You are the accountant for a small computer programming company. You must record the following
transactions. What values do you think you will use for each transaction?
A. The company purchased a secondhand van to be used to travel to customers. The sellers told you
they believe it is worth $12,500 but agreed to sell it to your company for $11,000. You believe the
company got a really good deal because the van has a $13,000 Blue Book value.
B. Your company purchased its office building five years ago for $175,000. Values of real estate have
been rising quickly over the last five years, and a realtor told you the company could easily sell it for
$250,000 today. Since the building is now worth $250,000, you are contemplating whether you
should increase its value on the books to reflect this estimated current market value.
C. Your company has performed a task for a customer. The customer agreed to a minimum price of
$2,350 for the work, but if the customer has absolutely no issues with the programming for the first
month, the customer will pay you $2,500 (which includes a bonus for work well done). The owner of
the company is almost 100% sure she will receive $2,500 for the job done. You have to record the
revenue earned and need to decide how much should be recorded.
D. The owner of the company believes the most valuable asset for his company is the employees. The
service the company provides depends on having intelligent, hardworking, dependable employees
who believe they need to deliver exactly what the customer wants in a reasonable amount of time.
Without the employees, the company would not be so successful. The owner wants to know if she
can include the value of her employees on the balance sheet as an asset.
Solution
A. The van must be recorded on the books at $11,000 per the cost principle. That is the price that was
agreed to between a willing buyer and seller.
B. The cost principle states that you must record an asset on the books for the price you bought it for
and then leave it on the books at that value unless there is a specific rule to the contrary. The
company purchased the building for $175,000. It must stay on the books at $175,000. Companies are
not allowed to increase the value of an asset on their books just because they believe it is worth
more.
C. You must record the revenue at $2,350 per the rules of conservatism. We do not want to record
revenue at $2,500 when we are not absolutely 100% sure that is what we will earn. Recording it at
$2,500 might mislead our statement users to think we have earned more revenue than we really
have.
D. Even though the employees are a wonderful asset for the company, they cannot be included on the
balance sheet as an asset. There is no way to assign a monetary value in US dollars to our
employees. Therefore, we cannot include them in our assets.

Reviewing and Analyzing Transactions
Let us assume our business is a service-based company. We use Lynn Sanders’ small printing company,
Printing Plus, as our example. Please notice that since Printing Plus is a corporation, we are using the Common
Stock account, instead of Owner’s Equity. The following are several transactions from this business’s current

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

137

month:
1. Issues $20,000 shares of common stock for cash.
2. Purchases equipment on account for $3,500, payment due within the month.
3. Receives $4,000 cash in advance from a customer for services not yet rendered.
4. Provides $5,500 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the services.
5. Pays a $300 utility bill with cash.
6. Distributed $100 cash in dividends to stockholders.
We now analyze each of these transactions, paying attention to how they impact the accounting equation and
corresponding financial statements.
Transaction 1: Issues $20,000 shares of common stock for cash.

Analysis: Looking at the accounting equation, we know cash is an asset and common stock is stockholder’s
equity. When a company collects cash, this will increase assets because cash is coming into the business. When
a company issues common stock, this will increase a stockholder’s equity because he or she is receiving
investments from owners.
Remember that the accounting equation must remain balanced, and assets need to equal liabilities plus
equity. On the asset side of the equation, we show an increase of $20,000. On the liabilities and equity side of
the equation, there is also an increase of $20,000, keeping the equation balanced. Changes to assets,
specifically cash, will increase assets on the balance sheet and increase cash on the statement of cash flows.
Changes to stockholder’s equity, specifically common stock, will increase stockholder’s equity on the balance
sheet.
Transaction 2: Purchases equipment on account for $3,500, payment due within the month.

Analysis: We know that the company purchased equipment, which is an asset. We also know that the
company purchased the equipment on account, meaning it did not pay for the equipment immediately and
asked for payment to be billed instead and paid later. Since the company owes money and has not yet paid,
this is a liability, specifically labeled as accounts payable. There is an increase to assets because the company
has equipment it did not have before. There is also an increase to liabilities because the company now owes
money. The more money the company owes, the more that liability will increase.
The accounting equation remains balanced because there is a $3,500 increase on the asset side, and a $3,500
increase on the liability and equity side. This change to assets will increase assets on the balance sheet. The
change to liabilities will increase liabilities on the balance sheet.
Transaction 3: Receives $4,000 cash in advance from a customer for services not yet rendered.

138

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Analysis: We know that the company collected cash, which is an asset. This collection of $4,000 increases
assets because money is coming into the business.
The company has yet to provide the service. According to the revenue recognition principle, the company
cannot recognize that revenue until it provides the service. Therefore, the company has a liability to the
customer to provide the service and must record the liability as unearned revenue. The liability of $4,000 worth
of services increases because the company has more unearned revenue than previously.
The equation remains balanced, as assets and liabilities increase. The balance sheet would experience an
increase in assets and an increase in liabilities.
Transaction 4: Provides $5,500 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the services.

Analysis: The customer asked to be billed for the service, meaning the customer did not pay with cash
immediately. The customer owes money and has not yet paid, signaling an accounts receivable. Accounts
receivable is an asset that is increasing in this case. This customer obligation of $5,500 adds to the balance in
accounts receivable.
The company did provide the services. As a result, the revenue recognition principle requires recognition as
revenue, which increases equity for $5,500. The increase to assets would be reflected on the balance sheet.
The increase to equity would affect three statements. The income statement would see an increase to
revenues, changing net income (loss). Net income (loss) is computed into retained earnings on the statement
of retained earnings. This change to retained earnings is shown on the balance sheet under stockholder’s
equity.
Transaction 5: Pays a $300 utility bill with cash.

Analysis: The company paid with cash, an asset. Assets are decreasing by $300 since cash was used to pay for
this utility bill. The company no longer has that money.
Utility payments are generated from bills for services that were used and paid for within the accounting
period, thus recognized as an expense. The expense decreases equity by $300. The decrease to assets,
specifically cash, affects the balance sheet and statement of cash flows. The decrease to equity as a result of
the expense affects three statements. The income statement would see a change to expenses, changing net
income (loss). Net income (loss) is computed into retained earnings on the statement of retained earnings.
This change to retained earnings is shown on the balance sheet under stockholder’s equity.
Transaction 6: Distributed $100 cash in dividends to stockholders.

Analysis: The company paid the distribution with cash, an asset. Assets decrease by $100 as a result.
Dividends affect equity and, in this case, decrease equity by $100. The decrease to assets, specifically cash,

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

139

affects the balance sheet and statement of cash flows. The decrease to equity because of the dividend payout
affects the statement of retained earnings by reducing ending retained earnings, and the balance sheet by
reducing stockholder’s equity.
Let’s summarize the transactions and make sure the accounting equation has remained balanced. Shown are
each of the transactions.

As you can see, assets total $32,600, while liabilities added to equity also equal $32,600. Our accounting
equation remains balanced. In Use Journal Entries to Record Transactions and Post to T-Accounts, we add
other elements to the accounting equation and expand the equation to include individual revenue and
expense accounts.

YOUR TURN
Debbie’s Dairy Farm
Debbie’s Dairy Farm had the following transactions:
A. Debbie ordered shelving worth $750.
B. Debbie’s selling price on a gallon of milk is $3.00. She finds out that most local stores are charging
$3.50. Based on this information, she decides to increase her price to $3.25. She has an employee
put a new price sticker on each gallon.
C. A customer buys a gallon of milk paying cash.
D. The shelving is delivered with an invoice for $750.
Which events will be recorded in the accounting system?
Solution
A. Debbie did not yet receive the shelving—it has only been ordered. As of now there is no new asset
owned by the company. Since the shelving has not yet been delivered, Debbie does not owe any
money to the other company. Debbie will not record the transaction.
B. Changing prices does not have an impact on the company at the time the price is changed. All that

140

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

happened was that a new price sticker was placed on the milk. Debbie still has all the milk and has
not received any money. Debbie will not record the transaction.
C. Debbie now has a transaction to record. She has received cash and the customer has taken some of
her inventory of milk. She has an increase in one asset (cash) and a decrease in another asset
(inventory.) She also has earned revenue.
D. Debbie has taken possession of the shelving and is the legal owner. She also has an increase in her
liabilities as she accepted delivery of the shelving but has not paid for it. Debbie will record this
transaction.

3.5

Use Journal Entries to Record Transactions and Post to T-Accounts

When we introduced debits and credits, you learned about the usefulness of T-accounts as a graphic
representation of any account in the general ledger. But before transactions are posted to the T-accounts, they
are first recorded using special forms known as journals.

Journals
Accountants use special forms called journals to keep track of their business transactions. A journal is the first
place information is entered into the accounting system. A journal is often referred to as the book of original
entry because it is the place the information originally enters into the system. A journal keeps a historical
account of all recordable transactions with which the company has engaged. In other words, a journal is
similar to a diary for a business. When you enter information into a journal, we say you are journalizing the
entry. Journaling the entry is the second step in the accounting cycle. Here is a picture of a journal.

You can see that a journal has columns labeled debit and credit. The debit is on the left side, and the credit is
on the right. Let’s look at how we use a journal.
When filling in a journal, there are some rules you need to follow to improve journal entry organization.

Formatting When Recording Journal Entries
• Include a date of when the transaction occurred.
• The debit account title(s) always come first and on the left.
• The credit account title(s) always come after all debit titles are entered, and on the right.
• The titles of the credit accounts will be indented below the debit accounts.
• You will have at least one debit (possibly more).
• You will always have at least one credit (possibly more).
• The dollar value of the debits must equal the dollar value of the credits or else the equation will go out of
balance.
• You will write a short description after each journal entry.
• Skip a space after the description before starting the next journal entry.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

141

An example journal entry format is as follows. It is not taken from previous examples but is intended to stand
alone.

Note that this example has only one debit account and one credit account, which is considered a simple entry.
A compound entry is when there is more than one account listed under the debit and/or credit column of a
journal entry (as seen in the following).

Notice that for this entry, the rules for recording journal entries have been followed. There is a date of April 1,
2018, the debit account titles are listed first with Cash and Supplies, the credit account title of Common Stock is
indented after the debit account titles, there are at least one debit and one credit, the debit amounts equal the
credit amount, and there is a short description of the transaction.
Let’s now look at a few transactions from Printing Plus and record their journal entries.

Recording Transactions
We now return to our company example of Printing Plus, Lynn Sanders’ printing service company. We will
analyze and record each of the transactions for her business and discuss how this impacts the financial
statements. Some of the listed transactions have been ones we have seen throughout this chapter. More detail
for each of these transactions is provided, along with a few new transactions.
1. On January 3, 2019, issues $20,000 shares of common stock for cash.
2. On January 5, 2019, purchases equipment on account for $3,500, payment due within the month.
3. On January 9, 2019, receives $4,000 cash in advance from a customer for services not yet rendered.
4. On January 10, 2019, provides $5,500 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the services.
5. On January 12, 2019, pays a $300 utility bill with cash.
6. On January 14, 2019, distributed $100 cash in dividends to stockholders.
7. On January 17, 2019, receives $2,800 cash from a customer for services rendered.
8. On January 18, 2019, paid in full, with cash, for the equipment purchase on January 5.
9. On January 20, 2019, paid $3,600 cash in salaries expense to employees.
10. On January 23, 2019, received cash payment in full from the customer on the January 10 transaction.
11. On January 27, 2019, provides $1,200 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the services.
12. On January 30, 2019, purchases supplies on account for $500, payment due within three months.
Transaction 1: On January 3, 2019, issues $20,000 shares of common stock for cash.

142

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Analysis:
• This is a transaction that needs to be recorded, as Printing Plus has received money, and the stockholders
have invested in the firm.
• Printing Plus now has more cash. Cash is an asset, which in this case is increasing. Cash increases on the
debit side.
• When the company issues stock, stockholders purchase common stock, yielding a higher common stock
figure than before issuance. The common stock account is increasing and affects equity. Looking at the
expanded accounting equation, we see that Common Stock increases on the credit side.

Impact on the financial statements: Both of these accounts are balance sheet accounts. You will see total
assets increase and total stockholders’ equity will also increase, both by $20,000. With both totals increasing by
$20,000, the accounting equation, and therefore our balance sheet, will be in balance. There is no effect on the
income statement from this transaction as there were no revenues or expenses recorded.

Transaction 2: On January 5, 2019, purchases equipment on account for $3,500, payment due within the
month.
Analysis:
• In this case, equipment is an asset that is increasing. It increases because Printing Plus now has more
equipment than it did before. Assets increase on the debit side; therefore, the Equipment account would
show a $3,500 debit.
• The company did not pay for the equipment immediately. Lynn asked to be sent a bill for payment at a
future date. This creates a liability for Printing Plus, who owes the supplier money for the equipment.
Accounts Payable is used to recognize this liability. This liability is increasing, as the company now owes
money to the supplier. A liability account increases on the credit side; therefore, Accounts Payable will
increase on the credit side in the amount of $3,500.

Impact on the financial statements: Since both accounts in the entry are balance sheet accounts, you will
see no effect on the income statement.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

143

Transaction 3: On January 9, 2019, receives $4,000 cash in advance from a customer for services not yet
rendered.
Analysis:
• Cash was received, thus increasing the Cash account. Cash is an asset that increases on the debit side.
• Printing Plus has not yet provided the service, meaning it cannot recognize the revenue as earned. The
company has a liability to the customer until it provides the service. The Unearned Revenue account
would be used to recognize this liability. This is a liability the company did not have before, thus
increasing this account. Liabilities increase on the credit side; thus, Unearned Revenue will recognize the
$4,000 on the credit side.

Impact on the financial statements: Since both accounts in the entry are balance sheet accounts, you will
see no effect on the income statement.

Transaction 4: On January 10, 2019, provides $5,500 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the
services.
Analysis:
• The company provided service to the client; therefore, the company may recognize the revenue as earned
(revenue recognition principle), which increases revenue. Service Revenue is a revenue account affecting
equity. Revenue accounts increase on the credit side; thus, Service Revenue will show an increase of
$5,500 on the credit side.
• The customer did not immediately pay for the services and owes Printing Plus payment. This money will
be received in the future, increasing Accounts Receivable. Accounts Receivable is an asset account. Asset
accounts increase on the debit side. Therefore, Accounts Receivable will increase for $5,500 on the debit
side.

144

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Impact on the financial statements: You have revenue of $5,500. Revenue is reported on your income
statement. The more revenue you have, the more net income (earnings) you will have. The more earnings you
have, the more retained earnings you will keep. Retained earnings is a stockholders’ equity account, so total
equity will increase $5,500. Accounts receivable is going up so total assets will increase by $5,500. The
accounting equation, and therefore the balance sheet, remain in balance.

Transaction 5: On January 12, 2019, pays a $300 utility bill with cash.
Analysis:
• Cash was used to pay the utility bill, which means cash is decreasing. Cash is an asset that decreases on
the credit side.
• Paying a utility bill creates an expense for the company. Utility Expense increases, and does so on the
debit side of the accounting equation.

Impact on the financial statements: You have an expense of $300. Expenses are reported on your income
statement. More expenses lead to a decrease in net income (earnings). The fewer earnings you have, the
fewer retained earnings you will end up with. Retained earnings is a stockholders’ equity account, so total
equity will decrease by $300. Cash is decreasing, so total assets will decrease by $300, impacting the balance
sheet.

Transaction 6: On January 14, 2019, distributed $100 cash in dividends to stockholders.
Analysis:
• Cash was used to pay the dividends, which means cash is decreasing. Cash is an asset that decreases on
the credit side.
• Dividends distribution occurred, which increases the Dividends account. Dividends is a part of
stockholder’s equity and is recorded on the debit side. This debit entry has the effect of reducing
stockholder’s equity.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

145

Impact on the financial statements: You have dividends of $100. An increase in dividends leads to a
decrease in stockholders’ equity (retained earnings). Cash is decreasing, so total assets will decrease by $100,
impacting the balance sheet.

Transaction 7: On January 17, 2019, receives $2,800 cash from a customer for services rendered.
Analysis:
• The customer used cash as the payment method, thus increasing the amount in the Cash account. Cash is
an asset that is increasing, and it does so on the debit side.
• Printing Plus provided the services, which means the company can recognize revenue as earned in the
Service Revenue account. Service Revenue increases equity; therefore, Service Revenue increases on the
credit side.

Impact on the financial statements: Revenue is reported on the income statement. More revenue will
increase net income (earnings), thus increasing retained earnings. Retained earnings is a stockholders’ equity
account, so total equity will increase $2,800. Cash is increasing, which increases total assets on the balance
sheet.

Transaction 8: On January 18, 2019, paid in full, with cash, for the equipment purchase on January 5.
Analysis:
• Cash is decreasing because it was used to pay for the outstanding liability created on January 5. Cash is an
asset and will decrease on the credit side.
• Accounts Payable recognized the liability the company had to the supplier to pay for the equipment. Since
the company is now paying off the debt it owes, this will decrease Accounts Payable. Liabilities decrease
on the debit side; therefore, Accounts Payable will decrease on the debit side by $3,500.

146

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Impact on the financial statements: Since both accounts in the entry are balance sheet accounts, you will
see no effect on the income statement.

Transaction 9: On January 20, 2019, paid $3,600 cash in salaries expense to employees.
Analysis:
• Cash was used to pay for salaries, which decreases the Cash account. Cash is an asset that decreases on
the credit side.
• Salaries are an expense to the business for employee work. This will increase Salaries Expense, affecting
equity. Expenses increase on the debit side; thus, Salaries Expense will increase on the debit side.

Impact on the financial statements: You have an expense of $3,600. Expenses are reported on the income
statement. More expenses lead to a decrease in net income (earnings). The fewer earnings you have, the
fewer retained earnings you will end up with. Retained earnings is a stockholders’ equity account, so total
equity will decrease by $3,600. Cash is decreasing, so total assets will decrease by $3,600, impacting the
balance sheet.

Transaction 10: On January 23, 2019, received cash payment in full from the customer on the January 10
transaction.
Analysis:
• Cash was received, thus increasing the Cash account. Cash is an asset, and assets increase on the debit
side.
• Accounts Receivable was originally used to recognize the future customer payment; now that the
customer has paid in full, Accounts Receivable will decrease. Accounts Receivable is an asset, and assets
decrease on the credit side.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

147

Impact on the financial statements: In this transaction, there was an increase to one asset (Cash) and a
decrease to another asset (Accounts Receivable). This means total assets change by $0, because the increase
and decrease to assets in the same amount cancel each other out. There are no changes to liabilities or
stockholders’ equity, so the equation is still in balance. Since there are no revenues or expenses affected, there
is no effect on the income statement.

Transaction 11: On January 27, 2019, provides $1,200 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the
services.
Analysis:
• The customer does not pay immediately for the services but is expected to pay at a future date. This
creates an Accounts Receivable for Printing Plus. The customer owes the money, which increases
Accounts Receivable. Accounts Receivable is an asset, and assets increase on the debit side.
• Printing Plus provided the service, thus earning revenue. Service Revenue would increase on the credit
side.

Impact on the financial statements: Revenue is reported on the income statement. More revenue will
increase net income (earnings), thus increasing retained earnings. Retained earnings is a stockholders’ equity
account, so total equity will increase $1,200. Cash is increasing, which increases total assets on the balance
sheet.

Transaction 12: On January 30, 2019, purchases supplies on account for $500, payment due within three
months.
Analysis:
• The company purchased supplies, which are assets to the business until used. Supplies is increasing,
because the company has more supplies than it did before. Supplies is an asset that is increasing on the

148

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

debit side.
• Printing Plus did not pay immediately for the supplies and asked to be billed for the supplies, payable at a
later date. This creates a liability for the company, Accounts Payable. This liability increases Accounts
Payable; thus, Accounts Payable increases on the credit side.

Impact on the financial statements: There is an increase to a liability and an increase to assets. These
accounts both impact the balance sheet but not the income statement.

The complete journal for these transactions is as follows:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

We now look at the next step in the accounting cycle, step 3: post journal information to the ledger.

149

150

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Colfax Market
Colfax Market is a small corner grocery store that carries a variety of staple items such as meat, milk,
eggs, bread, and so on. As a smaller grocery store, Colfax does not offer the variety of products found in
a larger supermarket or chain. However, it records journal entries in a similar way.
Grocery stores of all sizes must purchase product and track inventory. While the number of entries might
differ, the recording process does not. For example, Colfax might purchase food items in one large
quantity at the beginning of each month, payable by the end of the month. Therefore, it might only have
a few accounts payable and inventory journal entries each month. Larger grocery chains might have
multiple deliveries a week, and multiple entries for purchases from a variety of vendors on their accounts
payable weekly.
This similarity extends to other retailers, from clothing stores to sporting goods to hardware. No matter
the size of a company and no matter the product a company sells, the fundamental accounting entries
remain the same.

Posting to the General Ledger
Recall that the general ledger is a record of each account and its balance. Reviewing journal entries individually
can be tedious and time consuming. The general ledger is helpful in that a company can easily extract account
and balance information. Here is a small section of a general ledger.

You can see at the top is the name of the account “Cash,” as well as the assigned account number “101.”
Remember, all asset accounts will start with the number 1. The date of each transaction related to this account
is included, a possible description of the transaction, and a reference number if available. There are debit and
credit columns, storing the financial figures for each transaction, and a balance column that keeps a running
total of the balance in the account after every transaction.
Let’s look at one of the journal entries from Printing Plus and fill in the corresponding ledgers.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

151

As you can see, there is one ledger account for Cash and another for Common Stock. Cash is labeled account
number 101 because it is an asset account type. The date of January 3, 2019, is in the far left column, and a
description of the transaction follows in the next column. Cash had a debit of $20,000 in the journal entry, so
$20,000 is transferred to the general ledger in the debit column. The balance in this account is currently
$20,000, because no other transactions have affected this account yet.
Common Stock has the same date and description. Common Stock had a credit of $20,000 in the journal entry,
and that information is transferred to the general ledger account in the credit column. The balance at that
time in the Common Stock ledger account is $20,000.
Another key element to understanding the general ledger, and the third step in the accounting cycle, is how to
calculate balances in ledger accounts.

LINK TO LEARNING
It is a good idea to familiarize yourself with the type of information companies report each year. Peruse
Best Buy’s 2017 annual report (https://openstax.org/l/50BestBuy2017) to learn more about Best Buy.
Take note of the company’s balance sheet on page 53 of the report and the income statement on page
54. These reports have much more information than the financial statements we have shown you;
however, if you read through them you may notice some familiar items.

Calculating Account Balances
When calculating balances in ledger accounts, one must take into consideration which side of the account
increases and which side decreases. To find the account balance, you must find the difference between the

152

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

sum of all figures on the side that increases and the sum of all figures on the side that decreases.
For example, the Cash account is an asset. We know from the accounting equation that assets increase on the
debit side and decrease on the credit side. If there was a debit of $5,000 and a credit of $3,000 in the Cash
account, we would find the difference between the two, which is $2,000 (5,000 – 3,000). The debit is the larger
of the two sides ($5,000 on the debit side as opposed to $3,000 on the credit side), so the Cash account has a
debit balance of $2,000.
Another example is a liability account, such as Accounts Payable, which increases on the credit side and
decreases on the debit side. If there were a $4,000 credit and a $2,500 debit, the difference between the two is
$1,500. The credit is the larger of the two sides ($4,000 on the credit side as opposed to $2,500 on the debit
side), so the Accounts Payable account has a credit balance of $1,500.
The following are selected journal entries from Printing Plus that affect the Cash account. We will use the Cash
ledger account to calculate account balances.

The general ledger account for Cash would look like the following:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

153

In the last column of the Cash ledger account is the running balance. This shows where the account stands
after each transaction, as well as the final balance in the account. How do we know on which side, debit or
credit, to input each of these balances? Let’s consider the general ledger for Cash.
On January 3, there was a debit balance of $20,000 in the Cash account. On January 9, a debit of $4,000 was
included. Since both are on the debit side, they will be added together to get a balance on $24,000 (as is seen
in the balance column on the January 9 row). On January 12, there was a credit of $300 included in the Cash
ledger account. Since this figure is on the credit side, this $300 is subtracted from the previous balance of
$24,000 to get a new balance of $23,700. The same process occurs for the rest of the entries in the ledger and
their balances. The final balance in the account is $24,800.
Checking to make sure the final balance figure is correct; one can review the figures in the debit and credit
columns. In the debit column for this cash account, we see that the total is $32,300 (20,000 + 4,000 + 2,800 +
5,500). The credit column totals $7,500 (300 + 100 + 3,500 + 3,600). The difference between the debit and credit
totals is $24,800 (32,300 – 7,500). The balance in this Cash account is a debit of $24,800. Having a debit balance
in the Cash account is the normal balance for that account.

Posting to the T-Accounts
The third step in the accounting cycle is to post journal information to the ledger. To do this we can use a Taccount format. A company will take information from its journal and post to this general ledger. Posting
refers to the process of transferring data from the journal to the general ledger. It is important to understand
that T-accounts are only used for illustrative purposes in a textbook, classroom, or business discussion. They
are not official accounting forms. Companies will use ledgers for their official books, not T-accounts.
Let’s look at the journal entries for Printing Plus and post each of those entries to their respective T-accounts.
The following are the journal entries recorded earlier for Printing Plus.
Transaction 1: On January 3, 2019, issues $20,000 shares of common stock for cash.

154

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

In the journal entry, Cash has a debit of $20,000. This is posted to the Cash T-account on the debit side (left
side). Common Stock has a credit balance of $20,000. This is posted to the Common Stock T-account on the
credit side (right side).
Transaction 2: On January 5, 2019, purchases equipment on account for $3,500, payment due within the
month.

In the journal entry, Equipment has a debit of $3,500. This is posted to the Equipment T-account on the debit
side. Accounts Payable has a credit balance of $3,500. This is posted to the Accounts Payable T-account on the
credit side.
Transaction 3: On January 9, 2019, receives $4,000 cash in advance from a customer for services not yet
rendered.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

155

In the journal entry, Cash has a debit of $4,000. This is posted to the Cash T-account on the debit side. You will
notice that the transaction from January 3 is listed already in this T-account. The next transaction figure of
$4,000 is added directly below the $20,000 on the debit side. Unearned Revenue has a credit balance of $4,000.
This is posted to the Unearned Revenue T-account on the credit side.
Transaction 4: On January 10, 2019, provides $5,500 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the
services.

In the journal entry, Accounts Receivable has a debit of $5,500. This is posted to the Accounts Receivable Taccount on the debit side. Service Revenue has a credit balance of $5,500. This is posted to the Service Revenue
T-account on the credit side.
Transaction 5: On January 12, 2019, pays a $300 utility bill with cash.

156

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

In the journal entry, Utility Expense has a debit balance of $300. This is posted to the Utility Expense T-account
on the debit side. Cash has a credit of $300. This is posted to the Cash T-account on the credit side. You will
notice that the transactions from January 3 and January 9 are listed already in this T-account. The next
transaction figure of $300 is added on the credit side.
Transaction 6: On January 14, 2019, distributed $100 cash in dividends to stockholders.

In the journal entry, Dividends has a debit balance of $100. This is posted to the Dividends T-account on the
debit side. Cash has a credit of $100. This is posted to the Cash T-account on the credit side. You will notice that
the transactions from January 3, January 9, and January 12 are listed already in this T-account. The next
transaction figure of $100 is added directly below the January 12 record on the credit side.
Transaction 7: On January 17, 2019, receives $2,800 cash from a customer for services rendered.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

157

In the journal entry, Cash has a debit of $2,800. This is posted to the Cash T-account on the debit side. You will
notice that the transactions from January 3, January 9, January 12, and January 14 are listed already in this Taccount. The next transaction figure of $2,800 is added directly below the January 9 record on the debit side.
Service Revenue has a credit balance of $2,800. This too has a balance already from January 10. The new entry
is recorded under the Jan 10 record, posted to the Service Revenue T-account on the credit side.
Transaction 8: On January 18, 2019, paid in full, with cash, for the equipment purchase on January 5.

On this transaction, Cash has a credit of $3,500. This is posted to the Cash T-account on the credit side beneath
the January 14 transaction. Accounts Payable has a debit of $3,500 (payment in full for the Jan. 5 purchase).
You notice there is already a credit in Accounts Payable, and the new record is placed directly across from the
January 5 record.
Transaction 9: On January 20, 2019, paid $3,600 cash in salaries expense to employees.

158

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

On this transaction, Cash has a credit of $3,600. This is posted to the Cash T-account on the credit side beneath
the January 18 transaction. Salaries Expense has a debit of $3,600. This is placed on the debit side of the
Salaries Expense T-account.
Transaction 10: On January 23, 2019, received cash payment in full from the customer on the January 10
transaction.

On this transaction, Cash has a debit of $5,500. This is posted to the Cash T-account on the debit side beneath
the January 17 transaction. Accounts Receivable has a credit of $5,500 (from the Jan. 10 transaction). The
record is placed on the credit side of the Accounts Receivable T-account across from the January 10 record.
Transaction 11: On January 27, 2019, provides $1,200 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the
services.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

159

On this transaction, Accounts Receivable has a debit of $1,200. The record is placed on the debit side of the
Accounts Receivable T-account underneath the January 10 record. Service Revenue has a credit of $1,200. The
record is placed on the credit side of the Service Revenue T-account underneath the January 17 record.
Transaction 12: On January 30, 2019, purchases supplies on account for $500, payment due within three
months.

On this transaction, Supplies has a debit of $500. This will go on the debit side of the Supplies T-account.
Accounts Payable has a credit of $500. You notice there are already figures in Accounts Payable, and the new
record is placed directly underneath the January 5 record.

T-Accounts Summary
Once all journal entries have been posted to T-accounts, we can check to make sure the accounting equation
remains balanced. A summary showing the T-accounts for Printing Plus is presented in Figure 3.10.

160

Figure 3.10

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Summary of T-Accounts for Printing Plus. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The sum on the assets side of the accounting equation equals $30,000, found by adding together the final
balances in each asset account (24,800 + 1,200 + 500 + 3,500). To find the total on the liabilities and equity side
of the equation, we need to find the difference between debits and credits. Credits on the liabilities and equity
side of the equation total $34,000 (500 + 4,000 + 20,000 + 9,500). Debits on the liabilities and equity side of the
equation total $4,000 (100 + 3,600 + 300). The difference $34,000 – $4,000 = $30,000. Thus, the equation remains
balanced with $30,000 on the asset side and $30,000 on the liabilities and equity side. Now that we have the Taccount information, and have confirmed the accounting equation remains balanced, we can create the
unadjusted trial balance.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

YOUR TURN
Journalizing Transactions
You have the following transactions the last few days of April.

Apr. 25

You stop by your uncle’s gas station to refill both gas cans for your company, Watson’s
Landscaping. Your uncle adds the total of $28 to your account.

Apr. 26

You record another week’s revenue for the lawns mowed over the past week. You earned
$1,200. You received cash equal to 75% of your revenue.

Apr. 27

You pay your local newspaper $35 to run an advertisement in this week’s paper.

Apr. 29

You make a $25 payment on account.

Table 3.3
A. Prepare the necessary journal entries for these four transactions.
B. Explain why you debited and credited the accounts you did.
C. What will be the new balance in each account used in these entries?
Solution

April 25
• You have incurred more gas expense. This means you have an increase in the total amount of gas
expense for April. Expenses go up with debit entries. Therefore, you will debit gas expense.

161

162

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

• You purchased the gas on account. This will increase your liabilities. Liabilities increase with credit
entries. Credit accounts payable to increase the total in the account.
April 26
• You have received more cash from customers, so you want the total cash to increase. Cash is an
asset, and assets increase with debit entries, so debit cash.
• You also have more money owed to you by your customers. You have performed the services, your
customers owe you the money, and you will receive the money in the future. Debit accounts
receivable as asset accounts increase with debits.
• You have mowed lawns and earned more revenue. You want the total of your revenue account to
increase to reflect this additional revenue. Revenue accounts increase with credit entries, so credit
lawn-mowing revenue.
April 27
• Advertising is an expense of doing business. You have incurred more expenses, so you want to
increase an expense account. Expense accounts increase with debit entries. Debit advertising
expense.
• You paid cash for the advertising. You have less cash, so credit the cash account. Cash is an asset,
and asset account totals decrease with credits.
April 29
• You paid “on account.” Remember that “on account” means a service was performed or an item
was received without being paid for. The customer asked to be billed. You were the customer in this
case. You made a purchase of gas on account earlier in the month, and at that time you increased
accounts payable to show you had a liability to pay this amount sometime in the future. You are now
paying down some of the money you owe on that account. Since you paid this money, you now have
less of a liability so you want to see the liability account, accounts payable, decrease by the amount
paid. Liability accounts decrease with debit entries.
• You paid, which means you gave cash (or wrote a check or electronically transferred) so you have
less cash. To decrease the total cash, credit the account because asset accounts are reduced by
recording credit entries.

YOUR TURN
Normal Account Balances
Calculate the balances in each of the following accounts. Do they all have the normal balance they should
have? If not, which one? How do you know this?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Solution

163

164

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

THINK IT THROUGH
Gift Cards
Gift cards have become an important topic for managers of any company. Understanding who buys gift
cards, why, and when can be important in business planning. Also, knowing when and how to determine
that a gift card will not likely be redeemed will affect both the company’s balance sheet (in the liabilities
section) and the income statement (in the revenues section).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

165

According to a 2017 holiday shopping report from the National Retail Federation, gift cards are the mostrequested presents for the eleventh year in a row, with 61% of people surveyed saying they are at the top
of their wish lists, according to the National Retail Federation.
card volume will reach $160 billion by 2018.

[6]

CEB TowerGroup projects that total gift

[7]

How are all of these gift card sales affecting one of America’s favorite specialty coffee companies,
Starbucks?
In 2014 one in seven adults received a Starbucks gift card. On Christmas Eve alone $2.5 million gift cards
were sold. This is a rate of 1,700 cards per minute.

[8]

The following discussion about gift cards is taken from Starbucks’s 2016 annual report:
When an amount is loaded onto a stored value card we recognize a corresponding liability for
the full amount loaded onto the card, which is recorded within stored value card liability on
our consolidated balance sheets. When a stored value card is redeemed at a companyoperated store or online, we recognize revenue by reducing the stored value card liability.
When a stored value card is redeemed at a licensed store location, we reduce the
corresponding stored value card liability and cash, which is reimbursed to the licensee. There
are no expiration dates on our stored value cards, and in most markets, we do not charge
service fees that cause a decrement to customer balances. While we will continue to honor all
stored value cards presented for payment, management may determine the likelihood of
redemption, based on historical experience, is deemed to be remote for certain cards due to
long periods of inactivity. In these circumstances, unredeemed card balances may be
recognized as breakage income. In fiscal 2016, 2015, and 2014, we recognized breakage
[9]
income of $60.5 million, $39.3 million, and $38.3 million, respectively.
As of October 1, 2017, Starbucks had a total of $1,288,500,000 in stored value card liability.

3.6

Prepare a Trial Balance

Once all the monthly transactions have been analyzed, journalized, and posted on a continuous day-to-day
basis over the accounting period (a month in our example), we are ready to start working on preparing a trial
balance (unadjusted). Preparing an unadjusted trial balance is the fourth step in the accounting cycle. A trial
balance is a list of all accounts in the general ledger that have nonzero balances. A trial balance is an
important step in the accounting process, because it helps identify any computational errors throughout the
first three steps in the cycle.
Note that for this step, we are considering our trial balance to be unadjusted. The unadjusted trial balance in
this section includes accounts before they have been adjusted. As you see in step 6 of the accounting cycle, we
create another trial balance that is adjusted (see The Adjustment Process).
6 National Retail Federation (NRF). “NRF Consumer Survey Points to Busy Holiday Season, Backs Up Economic Forecast and Import
Numbers.” October 27, 2017. https://nrf.com/media-center/press-releases/nrf-consumer-survey-points-busy-holiday-season-backs-economicforecast
7 CEB Tower Group. “2015 Gift Card Sales to Reach New Peak of $130 Billion.” PR Newswire. December 8, 2015. https://www.prnewswire.com/
news-releases/2015-gift-card-sales-to-reach-new-peak-of-130-billion-300189615.html
8 Sara Haralson. “Last-Minute Shoppers Rejoice! Starbucks Has You Covered.” Fortune. December 22, 2015. http://fortune.com/video/2015/
12/22/starbucks-gift-cards/
9 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Communication from Starbucks Corporation regarding 2014 10-K Filing. November 14, 2014.
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/829224/000082922415000020/filename1.htm

166

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

When constructing a trial balance, we must consider a few formatting rules, akin to those requirements for
financial statements:
• The header must contain the name of the company, the label of a Trial Balance (Unadjusted), and the
date.
• Accounts are listed in the accounting equation order with assets listed first followed by liabilities and
finally equity.
• Amounts at the top of each debit and credit column should have a dollar sign.
• When amounts are added, the final figure in each column should be underscored.
• The totals at the end of the trial balance need to have dollar signs and be double-underscored.
Transferring information from T-accounts to the trial balance requires consideration of the final balance in
each account. If the final balance in the ledger account (T-account) is a debit balance, you will record the total
in the left column of the trial balance. If the final balance in the ledger account (T-account) is a credit balance,
you will record the total in the right column.
Once all ledger accounts and their balances are recorded, the debit and credit columns on the trial balance are
totaled to see if the figures in each column match each other. The final total in the debit column must be the
same dollar amount that is determined in the final credit column. For example, if you determine that the final
debit balance is $24,000 then the final credit balance in the trial balance must also be $24,000. If the two
balances are not equal, there is a mistake in at least one of the columns.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

167

Let’s now take a look at the T-accounts and unadjusted trial balance for Printing Plus to see how the
information is transferred from the T-accounts to the unadjusted trial balance.
For example, Cash has a final balance of $24,800 on the debit side. This balance is transferred to the Cash
account in the debit column on the unadjusted trial balance. Accounts Receivable ($1,200), Supplies ($500),
Equipment ($3,500), Dividends ($100), Salaries Expense ($3,600), and Utility Expense ($300) also have debit
final balances in their T-accounts, so this information will be transferred to the debit column on the unadjusted
trial balance. Accounts Payable ($500), Unearned Revenue ($4,000), Common Stock ($20,000) and Service
Revenue ($9,500) all have credit final balances in their T-accounts. These credit balances would transfer to the

168

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

credit column on the unadjusted trial balance.
Once all balances are transferred to the unadjusted trial balance, we will sum each of the debit and credit
columns. The debit and credit columns both total $34,000, which means they are equal and in balance.
However, just because the column totals are equal and in balance, we are still not guaranteed that a mistake is
not present.

What happens if the columns are not equal?

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Enron and Arthur Andersen
One of the most well-known financial schemes is that involving the companies Enron Corporation and
Arthur Andersen. Enron defrauded thousands by intentionally inflating revenues that did not exist.
Arthur Andersen was the auditing firm in charge of independently verifying the accuracy of Enron’s
financial statements and disclosures. This meant they would review statements to make sure they
aligned with GAAP principles, assumptions, and concepts, among other things.
It has been alleged that Arthur Andersen was negligent in its dealings with Enron and contributed to the
collapse of the company. Arthur Andersen was brought up on a charge of obstruction of justice for
shredding important documents related to criminal actions by Enron. They were found guilty but had
that conviction overturned. However, the damage was done, and the company’s reputation prevented it
from operating as it had.

[10]

Locating Errors
Sometimes errors may occur in the accounting process, and the trial balance can make those errors apparent
when it does not balance.

10 James Titcomb. “Arthur Andersen Returns 12 Years after Enron Scandal.” The Telegraph. September 2, 2014. https://www.telegraph.co.uk/
finance/newsbysector/banksandfinance/11069713/Arthur-Andersen-returns-12-years-after-Enron-scandal.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

169

One way to find the error is to take the difference between the two totals and divide the difference by two. For
example, let’s assume the following is the trial balance for Printing Plus.

You notice that the balances are not the same. Find the difference between the two totals: $34,100 – $33,900 =
$200 difference. Now divide the difference by two: $200/2 = $100. Since the credit side has a higher total, look
carefully at the numbers on the credit side to see if any of them are $100. The Dividends account has a $100
figure listed in the credit column. Dividends normally have a debit balance, but here it is a credit. Look back at
the Dividends T-account to see if it was copied onto the trial balance incorrectly. If the answer is the same as
the T-account, then trace it back to the journal entry to check for mistakes. You may discover in your
investigation that you copied the number from the T-account incorrectly. Fix your error, and the debit total will
go up $100 and the credit total down $100 so that they will both now be $34,000.
Another way to find an error is to take the difference between the two totals and divide by nine. If the outcome
of the difference is a whole number, then you may have transposed a figure. For example, let’s assume the
following is the trial balance for Printing Plus.

Find the difference between the two totals: $35,800 – 34,000 = $1,800 difference. This difference divided by nine

170

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

is $200 ($1,800/9 = $200). Looking at the debit column, which has the higher total, we determine that the
Equipment account had transposed figures. The account should be $3,500 and not $5,300. We transposed the
three and the five.
What do you do if you have tried both methods and neither has worked? Unfortunately, you will have to go
back through one step at a time until you find the error.
If a trial balance is in balance, does this mean that all of the numbers are correct? Not necessarily. We can
have errors and still be mathematically in balance. It is important to go through each step very carefully and
recheck your work often to avoid mistakes early on in the process.
After the unadjusted trial balance is prepared and it appears error-free, a company might look at its financial
statements to get an idea of the company’s position before adjustments are made to certain accounts. A more
complete picture of company position develops after adjustments occur, and an adjusted trial balance has
been prepared. These next steps in the accounting cycle are covered in The Adjustment Process.

YOUR TURN
Completing a Trial Balance
Complete the trial balance for Magnificent Landscaping Service using the following T-account final
balance information for April 30, 2018.

Solution

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

THINK IT THROUGH
Correcting Errors in the Trial Balance
You own a small consulting business. Each month, you prepare a trial balance showing your company’s
position. After preparing your trial balance this month, you discover that it does not balance. The debit
column shows $2,000 more dollars than the credit column. You decide to investigate this error.
What methods could you use to find the error? What are the ramifications if you do not find and fix this
error? How can you minimize these types of errors in the future?

171

172

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Key Terms
abnormal balance account balance that is contrary to the expected normal balance of that account
account record showing increases and decreases to assets, liabilities, and equity found in the accounting
equation
accounting cycle step-by-step process to record business activities and events to keep financial records up
to date
book of original entry journal is often referred to as this because it is the place the information originally
enters into the system
chart of accounts account numbering system that lists all the accounts a business uses in its day-to-day
transactions
compound entry more than one account is listed under the debit and/or credit column of a journal entry
conceptual framework interrelated objectives and fundamentals of accounting principles for financial
reporting
conservatism concept that if there is uncertainty in a potential financial estimate, a company should err on
the side of caution and report the most conservative amount
contributed capital owner’s investment (cash and other assets) in the business which typically comes in the
form of common stock
cost principle everything the company owns or controls (assets) must be recorded at its value at the date of
acquisition
credit records financial information on the right side of an account
debit records financial information on the left side of each account
double-entry accounting system requires the sum of the debits to equal the sum of the credits for each
transaction
ending account balance difference between debits and credits for an account
expanded accounting equation breaks down the equity portion of the accounting equation into more detail
to see the impact to equity from changes to revenues and expenses, and to owner investments and
payouts
expense recognition principle (also, matching principle) matches expenses with associated revenues in the
period in which the revenues were generated
full disclosure principle business must report any business activities that could affect what is reported on
the financial statements
general ledger comprehensive listing of all of a company’s accounts with their individual balances
going concern assumption absent any evidence to the contrary, assumption that a business will continue to
operate in the indefinite future
journal record of all transactions
journalizing entering information into a journal; second step in the accounting cycle
monetary measurement system of using a monetary unit by which to value the transaction, such as the US
dollar
normal balance expected balance each account type maintains, which is the side that increases
original source traceable record of information that contributes to the creation of a business transaction
period one operating cycle of a business, which could be a month, quarter, or year
posting takes all transactions from the journal during a period and moves the information to a general
ledger (ledger)
prepaid expenses items paid for in advance of their use

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

173

revenue recognition principle principle stating that a company must recognize revenue in the period in
which it is earned; it is not considered earned until a product or service has been provided
separate entity concept business may only report activities on financial statements that are specifically
related to company operations, not those activities that affect the owner personally
simple entry only one debit account and one credit account are listed under the debit and credit columns of
a journal entry
stockholders‛ equity owner (stockholders‛) investments in the business and earnings
T-account graphic representation of a general ledger account in which each account is visually split into left
and right sides
time period assumption companies can present useful information in shorter time periods such as years,
quarters, or months
transaction business activity or event that has an effect on financial information presented on financial
statements
trial balance list of all accounts in the general ledger that have nonzero balances
unadjusted trial balance trial balance that includes accounts before they have been adjusted
unearned revenue advance payment for a product or service that has yet to be provided by the company;
the transaction is a liability until the product or service is provided

Summary
3.1 Describe Principles, Assumptions, and Concepts of Accounting and Their Relationship to Financial
Statements
• The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) is an independent, nonprofit organization that sets the
standards for financial accounting and reporting standards for both public- and private-sector businesses
in the United States, including generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
• GAAP are the concepts, standards, and rules that guide the preparation and presentation of financial
statements.
• The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is an independent federal agency that is charged with
protecting the interests of investors, regulating stock markets, and ensuring companies adhere to GAAP
requirements.
• The FASB uses a conceptual framework, which is a set of concepts that guide financial reporting.
• The revenue recognition principle requires companies to record revenue when it is earned. Revenue is
earned when a product or service has been provided.
• The expense recognition principle requires that expenses incurred match with revenues earned in the
same period. The expenses are associated with revenue generation.
• The cost principle records assets at their value at the date of acquisition. A company may not record what
it estimates or thinks the value of the asset is, only what is verifiable. This verification is typically
represented by an actual transaction.
• The full disclosure principle requires companies to relay any information to the public that may affect
financials that are not readily available on the financial statements. This helps users of information make
decisions that are more informed.
• The separate entity concept maintains that only business activities, and not the owner’s personal
financials, may be reported on company financial statements.
• Conservatism prescribes that a company should record expenses or losses when there is an expectation
of their existence but only recognize gains or revenue when there is assurance that they will be realized.
• Monetary measurement requires a monetary unit be used to report financial information, such as the US

174

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

dollar. This makes information comparable.
• The going concern assumption assumes that a business will continue to operate in the foreseeable
future. If there is a concern the business will not continue operating, this needs to be disclosed to
management and other users of information.
• Time period assumption presents financial information in equal and short time frames, such as a month,
quarter, or year.
• The accounting equation shows that assets must equal the sum of liabilities and equity. Transactions are
analyzed with this equation to prepare for the next step in the accounting cycle.
3.2 Define and Describe the Expanded Accounting Equation and Its Relationship to Analyzing
Transactions
• The expanded accounting equation breaks down the equity portion of the accounting equation into more
detail to show common stock, dividends, revenue, and expenses individually.
• The chart of accounts is a numbering system that lists all of a company’s accounts in the order in which
they appear on the financial statements, beginning with the balance sheet accounts and then the income
statement accounts.
3.3 Define and Describe the Initial Steps in the Accounting Cycle
• Step 1 in the accounting cycle: Identifying and analyzing transactions requires a company to take
information from an original source, identify its purpose as a financial transaction, and connect that
information to an accounting equation.
• Step 2 in the accounting cycle: Recording transactions to a journal takes financial information identified in
the transaction and copies that information, using the accounting equation, into a journal. The journal is a
record of all transactions.
• Step 3 in the accounting cycle: Posting journal information to a ledger takes all information transferred to
the journal and posts it to a general ledger. The general ledger in an accumulation of all accounts a
company maintains and their balances.
• Step 4 in the accounting cycle: Preparing an unadjusted trial balance requires transfer of information
from the general ledger (T-accounts) to an unadjusted trial balance showing all account balances.
3.4 Analyze Business Transactions Using the Accounting Equation and Show the Impact of Business
Transactions on Financial Statements
• Both the basic and the expanded accounting equations are useful in analyzing how any transaction
affects a company’s financial statements.
3.5 Use Journal Entries to Record Transactions and Post to T-Accounts
• Journals are the first place where information is entered into the accounting system, which is why they are
often referred to as books of original entry.
• Journalizing transactions transfers information from accounting equation analysis to a record of each
transaction.
• There are several formatting rules for journalizing transactions that include where to put debits and
credits, which account titles come first, the need for a date and inclusion of a brief description.
• Step 3 in the accounting cycle posts journal information to the general ledger (T-accounts). Final balances
in each account must be calculated before transfer to the trial balance occurs.
3.6 Prepare a Trial Balance
• The trial balance contains a listing of all accounts in the general ledger with nonzero balances.
Information is transferred from the T-accounts to the trial balance.
• Sometimes errors occur on the trial balance, and there are ways to find these errors. One may have to go

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

175

through each step of the accounting process to locate an error on the trial balance.

Multiple Choice
1.

3.1 That a business may only report activities on financial statements that are specifically related to

company operations, not those activities that affect the owner personally, is known as which of the following?
A.

separate entity concept

B.

monetary measurement concept

C.

going concern assumption

D.

time period assumption

2.

3.1 That companies can present useful information in shorter time periods such as years, quarters, or

months is known as which of the following?
A.

separate entity concept

B.

monetary measurement concept

C.

going concern assumption

D.

time period assumption

3.

3.1 The system of using a monetary unit, such as the US dollar, to value the transaction is known as

which of the following?
A.

separate entity concept

B.

monetary measurement concept

C.

going concern assumption

D.

time period assumption

4.

3.1 Which of the following terms is used when assuming a business will continue to operate in the

foreseeable future?
A.

separate entity concept

B.

monetary measurement concept

C.

going concern assumption

D.

time period assumption

5.

3.1 The independent, nonprofit organization that sets financial accounting and reporting standards for

both public- and private-sector businesses that use generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) in the
United States is which of the following?
A.

Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)

B.

generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)

C.

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)

D.

conceptual framework

6.

3.1 The standards, procedures, and principles companies must follow when preparing their financial

statements are known as which of the following?
A.

Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)

B.

generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)

C.

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)

D.

conceptual framework

176

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

7.

3.1 These are used by the FASB, and it is a set of concepts that guide financial reporting.
A.

Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)

B.

generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)

C.

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)

D.

conceptual framework

8.

3.1 This is the independent federal agency protecting the interests of investors, regulating stock markets,

and ensuring companies adhere to GAAP requirements.
A.

Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)

B.

generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)

C.

Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)

D.

conceptual framework

9.

3.1 Which of the following is the principle that a company must recognize revenue in the period in which

it is earned; it is not considered earned until a product or service has been provided?
A.

revenue recognition principle

B.

expense recognition (matching) principle

C.

cost principle

D.

full disclosure principle

10.

3.1 Which of the following is the principle that a business must report any business activities that could

affect what is reported on the financial statements?
A.

revenue recognition principle

B.

expense recognition (matching) principle

C.

cost principle

D.

full disclosure principle

11.

3.1 Also known as the historical cost principle, ________ states that everything the company owns or

controls (assets) must be recorded at their value at the date of acquisition.
A.

revenue recognition principle

B.

expense recognition (matching) principle

C.

cost principle

D.

full disclosure principle

12.

3.1 Which of the following principles matches expenses with associated revenues in the period in which

the revenues were generated?
A.

revenue recognition principle

B.

expense recognition (matching) principle

C.

cost principle

D.

full disclosure principle

13.

3.2 Which of the following does not accurately represent the accounting equation?
A.

Assets – Liabilities = Stockholders’ Equity

B.

Assets – Stockholders’ Equity = Liabilities

C.

Assets = Liabilities + Stockholders’ Equity

D.

Assets + Liabilities = Stockholders’ Equity

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

14.

177

3.2 Which of these statements is false?
A.

Assets = Liabilities + Equity

B.

Assets – Liabilities = Equity

C.

Liabilities – Equity = Assets

D.

Liabilities = Assets – Equity

15.

3.2 Which of these accounts is an asset?
A.

Common Stock

B.

Supplies

C.

Accounts Payable

D.

Fees Earned

16.

3.2 Which of these accounts is a liability?
A.

Accounts Receivable

B.

Supplies

C.

Salaries Expense

D.

Accounts Payable

17.

3.2 If equity equals $100,000, which of the following is true?
A.

Assets exceed liabilities by $100,000.

B.

Liabilities exceed equity by $100,000.

C.

Assets + liabilities equal $100,000.

D.

None of the above is true.

18.

3.3 Which process of the accounting cycle often requires the most analytical thought?
A.

making a journal entry

B.

posting transactions to accounts

C.

summarizing the trial balance

D.

preparing the financial statements

19.

3.3 The step-by-step process to record business activities and events to keep financial records up to

date is ________.
A.

day-to-day cycle

B.

accounting cycle

C.

general ledger

D.

journal

20.

3.3 One operating cycle of a business, which could be a month, quarter, or year, is commonly referred

to as which of the following?
A.

period

B.

round

C.

tally

D.

mark

21.

3.3 ________ takes all transactions from the journal during a period and moves the information to a

general ledger (ledger).
A.

Hitching

B.

Posting

C.

Vetting

D.

Laxing

178

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

22.

3.4 Which of these events will not be recognized?
A.

A service is performed, but the payment is not collected on the same day.

B.

Supplies are purchased. They are not paid for; the company will be billed.

C.

A copy machine is ordered. It will be delivered in two weeks.

D.

Electricity has been used but has not been paid for.

23.

3.4 A company purchased a building twenty years ago for $150,000. The building currently has an

appraised market value of $235,000. The company reports the building on its balance sheet at $235,000. What
concept or principle has been violated?
A.

separate entity concept

B.

recognition principle

C.

monetary measurement concept

D.

cost principle

24.

3.4 What is the impact on the accounting equation when a current month’s utility expense is paid?
A.

both sides increase

B.

both sides decrease

C.

only the Asset side changes

D.

neither side changes

25.

3.4 What is the impact on the accounting equation when a payment of account payable is made?
A.

both sides increase

B.

both sides decrease

C.

only the Asset side changes

D.

neither side changes

26.

3.4 What is the impact on the accounting equation when an accounts receivable is collected?
A.

both sides increase

B.

both sides decrease

C.

only the Asset side changes

D.

the total of neither side changes

27.

3.4 What is the impact on the accounting equation when a sale occurs?
A.

both sides increase

B.

both sides decrease

C.

only the Asset side changes

D.

neither side changes

28.

3.4 What is the impact on the accounting equation when stock is issued, in exchange for assets?
A.

both sides increase

B.

both sides decrease

C.

only the Asset side changes

D.

neither side changes

29.

3.5 Which of the following accounts is increased by a debit?
A.

Common Stock

B.

Accounts Payable

C.

Supplies

D.

Service Revenue

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

30.

3.5 Which of the following accounts does not increase with a debit entry?
A.

Retained Earnings

B.

Buildings

C.

Prepaid Rent

D.

Electricity Expense

31.

3.5 Which of the following pairs increase with credit entries?
A.

supplies and retained earnings

B.

rent expense and unearned revenue

C.

prepaid rent and common stock

D.

unearned service revenue and accounts payable

32.

3.5 Which of the following pairs of accounts are impacted the same with debits and credits?
A.

Cash and Unearned Service Revenue

B.

Electricity Expense and Office Supplies

C.

Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable

D.

Buildings and Common Stock

33.

3.5 Which of the following accounts will normally have a debit balance?
A.

Common Stock

B.

Fees Earned

C.

Supplies

D.

Accounts Payable

34.

3.5 What type of account is prepaid insurance?
A.

Stockholders’ Equity

B.

Expense

C.

Liability

D.

Asset

35.

3.5 Unearned service revenue occurs when which of the following occurs?
A.

company receives cash from a customer before performing the service

B.

company pays cash before receiving a service from a supplier

C.

company pays cash after receiving a service from a supplier

D.

company receives cash from a customer after performing a service

36.

3.5 Which set of accounts has the same type of normal balance?
A.

Cash, accounts payable

B.

Prepaid rent, unearned service revenue

C.

Dividends, common stock

D.

Accounts payable, retained earnings

37.

3.5 Which of these transactions requires a debit entry to Cash?
A.

paid balance due to suppliers

B.

sold merchandise on account

C.

collected balance due from customers

D.

purchased supplies for cash

179

180

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

38.

3.5 Which of these transactions requires a credit entry to Revenue?
A.

received cash from services performed this month

B.

collected balance due from customers

C.

received cash from bank loan

D.

refunded a customer for a defective product

39.

3.5 Which of these accounts commonly requires both debit and credit entries?
A.

Sales Revenue

B.

Utilities Expense

C.

Accounts Receivable

D.

Common Stock

40.

3.5 Which of the following accounting records is the main source of information used to prepare the

financial statements?
A.

journal entries

B.

T-accounts

C.

trial balance

D.

chart of accounts

41.

3.5 Which of the following financial statements should be prepared first?
A.

Balance Sheet

B.

Income Statement

C.

Retained Earnings Statement

D.

Statement of Cash Flows

Questions
1.

3.1 Explain what conservatism means, and give an example in your own words.

2.

3.2 State the accounting equation, and explain what each part represents.

3.

3.2 How do revenues and expenses affect the accounting equation?

4.

3.2 Does every transaction affect both sides of the accounting equation? Explain your answer.

5.

3.3 Which is the “book of original entry”?

6.

3.4 What is the effect on the accounting equation when a business purchases supplies on account?

7.

3.4 What is the effect on the accounting equation when a business pays the balance due on accounts

payable?
8.

3.4 Is it still necessary to record a transaction if it has no net effect on the accounting equation? Explain

your answer.
9.

3.4 Why does the combined total of the company’s liabilities and equity always equal the total of the

company’s assets?
10.

3.5 What do the terms “debit” and “credit” mean?

11.

3.5 Will an accounts receivable balance increase with a debit or a credit entry? How do you know?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

12.

3.5 What types of accounts will increase with a credit?

13.

3.5 What is a journal?

14.

3.5 Why is a journal referred to as the “book of original entry”?

15.

3.5 What does the term recognize mean?

16.

3.5 What are the rules you should follow when recording journal entries?

17.

3.5 What is the general ledger?

18.

3.5 Explain the steps in posting.

19.

3.5 What is a T-account? When would we use T-accounts?

20.

3.5 Explain normal balances. Give three examples of accounts that will normally have a debit balance

and three accounts that will normally have a credit balance.
21.

3.5 What is a prepaid account? What type of account is it?

22.

3.5 What is an unearned account? What type of account is it?

23.

3.5 Explain what a T-account is and what purpose it serves.

24.

3.5 Can a credit entry be described as a generally positive or negative transaction? Explain.

25.

3.5 What types of accounts are increased with a debit?

26.

3.5 What types of accounts are increased with a credit?

27.

3.5 What does an account’s “normal balance” indicate?

28.

3.5 Does the order in which financial statements are prepared matter?

29.

3.5 Answer the following questions about the trial balance: What is the purpose of it? What is the

primary usefulness of it?

181

182

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Exercise Set A
EA1.

3.1 Match the correct term with its definition.

A. cost principle

i. if uncertainty in a potential financial estimate, a company should err on the side of
caution and report the most conservative amount

B. full disclosure

ii. also known as the historical cost principle, states that everything the company owns

principle

or controls (assets) must be recorded at their value at the date of acquisition

C. separate

iii. (also referred to as the matching principle) matches expenses with associated

entity concept

revenues in the period in which the revenues were generated

D. monetary

iv. business must report any business activities that could affect what is reported on

measurement

the financial statements

concept
E. conservatism

v. system of using a monetary unit by which to value the transaction, such as the US
dollar

F. revenue

vi. period of time in which you performed the service or gave the customer the

recognition

product is the period in which revenue is recognized

principle
G. expense

vii. business may only report activities on financial statements that are specifically

recognition

related to company operations, not those activities that affect the owner personally

principle
EA2.

3.2 Consider the following accounts, and determine if the account is an asset (A), a liability (L), or

equity (E).
A.

Accounts Payable

B.

Cash

C.

Dividends

D.

Notes Payable

EA3.

3.2 Provide the missing amounts of the accounting equation for each of the following companies.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EA4.

183

3.2 Identify the financial statement on which each of the following accounts would appear: the income

statement (IS), the retained earnings statement (RE), or the Balance Sheet (BS).
A.

Insurance Expense

B.

Accounts Receivable

C.

Office Supplies

D.

Sales Revenue

E.

Common Stock

F.

Notes Payable

EA5.

3.2 Cromwell Company has the following trial balance account balances, given in no certain order, as

of December 31, 2018. Using the information provided, prepare Cromwell’s annual financial statements (omit
the Statement of Cash Flows).

EA6.

3.3 From the following list, identify which items are considered original sources:

A.

prepaid insurance

B.

bank statement

C.

sales ticket

D.

general journal

E.

trial balance

F.

balance sheet

G.

telephone bill

H. invoice from supplier
I.

company sales account

J.

income statement

184

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EA7.

3.4 Indicate what impact the following transactions would have on the accounting equation, Assets =

Liabilities + Equity.

Impact 1
A.

Received cash from issuance of common stock

B.

Sold goods to customers on account

C.

Collected cash from customer sales made in previous month

D.

Paid cash to vendors for supplies delivered last month

E.

Purchased inventory on account

Impact 2

Table 3.4
EA8.

3.4 For the following accounts please indicate whether the normal balance is a debit or a credit.

A.

Sales

B.

Dividends

C.

Office Supplies

D.

Retained Earnings

E.

Accounts Receivable

F.

Prepaid Rent

G.

Prepaid Insurance

H. Wages Payable
I.

Building

J.

Wages Expense

EA9.

3.4 Indicate what impact the following transactions would have on the accounting equation, Assets =

Liabilities + Equity.

Impact 1
A.

Paid monthly note payment to bank

B.

Sold inventory on account

C.

Bought supplies, to be paid for next month

D.

Received cash from sales this month

E.

Paid for inventory purchased on account last month

Table 3.5

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Impact 2

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EA10.

185

3.4 Identify the normal balance for each of the following accounts. Choose Dr for Debit; Cr for Credit.

Normal balance
A.

Utilities Expense

B.

Cash

C.

Equipment

D.

Rent Revenue

E.

Preferred Stock

F.

Interest Payable

Table 3.6
EA11.

3.4 Identify whether each of the following transactions would be recorded with a debit (Dr) or credit

(Cr) entry.

Debit or credit?
A.

Cash increase

B.

Supplies decrease

C.

Accounts Payable increase

D.

Common Stock decrease

E.

Interest Payable decrease

F.

Notes Payable decrease

Table 3.7

186

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EA12.

3.4 Identify whether each of the following transactions would be recorded with a debit (Dr) or credit

(Cr) entry.

Debit or credit?
A.

Equipment decrease

B.

Common Stock Sold increase

C.

Gas and Oil Expense increase

D.

Service revenue decrease

E.

Miscellaneous Expense decrease

F.

Bonds Payable decrease

Table 3.8
EA13.

3.4 Identify whether ongoing transactions posted to the following accounts would normally have only

debit entries (Dr), only credit entries (Cr), or both debit and credit entries (both).

Type of entry
A.

Accounts Payable

B.

Cash

C.

Gas and Oil Expense

D.

Rent Revenue

E.

Supplies Expense

F.

Common Stock

Table 3.9
EA14.

3.5 Determine whether the balance in each of the following accounts increases with a debit or a

credit.
A.

Cash

B.

Common Stock

C.

Equipment

D.

Accounts Payable

E.

Fees Earned

F.

Electricity Expense

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EA15.

187

3.5 Journalize for Harper and Co. each of the following transactions or state no entry required and

explain why. Be sure to follow proper journal writing rules.
A.

A corporation is started with an investment of $50,000 in exchange for stock.

B.

Equipment worth $4,800 is ordered.

C.

Office supplies worth $750 are purchased on account.

D.

A part-time worker is hired. The employee will work 15–20 hours per week starting next Monday at a
rate of $18 per hour.

E.

The equipment is received along with the invoice. Payment is due in three equal monthly installments,
with the first payment due in sixty days.

EA16.

3.5 Discuss how each of the following transactions for Watson, International, will affect assets,

liabilities, and stockholders’ equity, and prove the company’s accounts will still be in balance.
A.

An investor invests an additional $25,000 into a company receiving stock in exchange.

B.

Services are performed for customers for a total of $4,500. Sixty percent was paid in cash, and the
remaining customers asked to be billed.

C.

An electric bill was received for $35. Payment is due in thirty days.

D.

Part-time workers earned $750 and were paid.

E.

The electric bill in “C” is paid.

EA17.

3.5 For each item that follows, indicate whether a debit or a credit applies.

A.

increase in prepaid insurance

B.

increase in utilities expense

C.

increase in commissions earned

D.

increase in supplies

E.

decrease in retained earnings

F.

decrease in income taxes payable

G.

increase in unearned revenue

H. increase in salaries expense
I.

decrease in notes receivable

J.

increase in common stock

EA18.

3.5 Indicate whether each account that follows has a normal debit or credit balance.

A.

Unearned Revenue

B.

Office Machines

C.

Prepaid Rent

D.

Cash

E.

Legal Fees Earned

F.

Salaries Payable

G.

Dividends

H. Accounts Receivable
I.

Advertising Expense

J.

Retained Earnings

188

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EA19.

3.5 A business has the following transactions:

• The business is started by receiving cash from an investor in exchange for common stock $20,000
• The business purchases supplies on account $500
• The business purchases furniture on account $2,000
• The business renders services to various clients on account totaling $9,000
• The business pays salaries $2,000
• The business pays this month’s rent $3,000
• The business pays for the supplies purchased on account.
• The business collects from one of its clients for services rendered earlier in the month $1,500.
What is total income for the month?
EA20.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions.

A.

January 22, purchased, an asset, merchandise inventory

B.

on account for $2,800.

C.

February 10, paid creditor for part of January 22 purchase, $1,600

EA21.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions.

A.

July 1, issued common stock for cash, $15,000

B.

July 15, purchased supplies, on account, $1,800

C.

July 25, billed customer for accounting services provided, $950

EA22.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions.

A.

March 1, purchased land for cash, $20,000

B.

March 11, purchased merchandise inventory, on account, $18,500

C.

March 15, Sold merchandise to customer for cash, $555

EA23.

3.5 Post the following February transactions to T-accounts for Accounts Receivable and Cash,

indicating the ending balance (assume no beginning balances in these accounts).
A.

provided legal services to customers for cash, $5,600

B.

provided legal services to customers on account, $4,700

C.

collected cash from customer accounts, $3,500

EA24.

3.5 Post the following November transactions to T-accounts for Accounts Payable and Inventory,

indicating the ending balance (assume no beginning balances in these accounts).
A.

purchased merchandise inventory on account, $22,000

B.

paid vendors for part of inventory purchased earlier in month, $14,000

C.

purchased merchandise inventory for cash, $6,500

EA25.

3.6 Prepare an unadjusted trial balance, in correct format, from the alphabetized account

information as follows. Assume all accounts have normal balances.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

3.1 Match the correct term with its definition.

A. Financial

i. used by the FASB, which is a set of concepts that guide financial reporting

Accounting
Standards Board
(FASB)
B. generally

ii. independent, nonprofit organization that sets financial accounting and reporting

accepted

standards for both public- and private-sector businesses that use generally accepted

accounting

accounting principles (GAAP) here in the United States

principles (GAAP)
C. Securities and

iii. standards, procedures, and principles companies must follow when preparing

Exchange

their financial statements

Commission
(SEC)
D. conceptual

iv. assumes a business will continue to operate in the foreseeable future

framework
E. going concern

v. independent federal agency protecting the interests of investors, regulating stock

assumption

markets, and ensuring companies adhere to GAAP requirements

F. time period

vi. companies can present useful information in shorter time periods such as years,

assumption

quarters, or months

EB2.

3.2 Consider the following accounts and determine if the account is an asset (A), a liability (L), or

equity (E).
A.

Accounts Receivable

B.

Sales Revenue

C.

Land

D.

Unearned Revenue

EB3.

3.2 Provide the missing amounts of the accounting equation for each of the following companies.

189

190

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EB4.

3.3 From the following list, identify which items are considered original sources:

A.

accounts receivable

B.

receipt from post office for post office box

C.

purchase order

D.

general ledger

E.

adjusted trial balance

F.

statement of retained earnings

G.

electric bill

H. packing slip
I.

company expense account

J.

statement of cash flows

EB5.

3.4 Indicate what impact the following transactions would have on the accounting equation, Assets =

Liabilities + Equity.

Impact 1
A.

Paid this month’s utility bill

B.

Purchased supplies for cash

C.

Received cash for services performed

D.

Collected cash from customer accounts receivable

E.

Paid creditors on account

Table 3.10
EB6.

3.4 For the following accounts indicate whether the normal balance is a debit or a credit.

A.

Unearned Revenue

B.

Interest Expense

C.

Rent Expense

D.

Rent Revenue

E.

Accounts Payable

F.

Cash

G.

Supplies

H. Accounts Payable
I.

Equipment

J.

Utilities Expense

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Impact 2

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EB7.

191

3.4 Which two accounts are affected by each of the following transactions?

Account 1
A.

Received cash from issuance of common stock

B.

Purchased land by issuing a note payable

C.

Paid balance on account for last month’s inventory purchases

D.

Received cash from customers for this month’s sales

E.

Sold merchandise to customers on account

Account 2

Table 3.11
EB8.

3.4 Identify the normal balance for each of the following accounts. Choose Dr for Debit; Cr for Credit.

Normal balance
A.

Insurance Expense

B.

Accounts Receivable

C.

Office Supplies

D.

Sales Revenue

E.

Common Stock

F.

Notes Payable

Table 3.12

192

EB9.

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

3.4 Identify whether each of the following transactions would be recorded with a debit (Dr) or credit

(Cr) entry.

Debit or credit?
A.

Cash decrease

B.

Supplies increase

C.

Accounts Payable decrease

D.

Common Stock increase

E.

Accounts Payable increase

F.

Notes Payable increase

Table 3.13
EB10.

3.4 Identify whether each of the following transactions would be recorded with a debit (Dr) or credit

(Cr) entry.

Debit or credit?
A.

Equipment increase

B.

Dividends Paid increase

C.

Repairs Expense increase

D.

Service revenue increase

E.

Miscellaneous Expense increase

F.

Bonds Payable increase

Table 3.14

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EB11.

193

3.4 Identify whether ongoing transactions posted to the following accounts would normally have only

debit entries (Dr), only credit entries (Cr), or both debit and credit entries (both).

Type of entry
A.

Notes Payable

B.

Accounts Receivable

C.

Utilities Expense

D.

Sales Revenue

E.

Insurance Expense

F.

Dividends

Table 3.15
EB12.

3.2

3.4 West End Inc., an auto mechanic shop, has the following account balances, given in no

certain order, for the quarter ended March 31, 2019. Based on the information provided, prepare West End’s
annual financial statements (omit the Statement of Cash Flows).

Prepare West End’s annual financial statements. (Omit the Statement of Cash Flows.)
EB13.

3.5 State whether the balance in each of the following accounts increases with a debit or a credit.

A.

Office Supplies

B.

Retained Earnings

C.

Salaries Expense

D.

Accounts Receivable

E.

Service Revenue

194

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EB14.

3.5 Journalize each of the following transactions or state no entry required and explain why. Be sure

to follow proper journal writing rules.
A.

A company is started with an investment of a machine worth $40,000. Common stock is received in
exchange.

B.

Office furniture is ordered. The furniture worth $7,850 will be delivered in one week. The payment will
be due forty-five days after delivery.

C.

An advertisement was run in the newspaper at a total cost of $250. Cash was paid when the order was
placed.

D.

The office furniture is delivered.

E.

Services are performed for a client. The client was billed for $535.

EB15.

3.5 Discuss how each of the following transactions will affect assets, liabilities, and stockholders’

equity, and prove the company’s accounts will still be in balance.
A.

A company purchased $450 worth of office supplies on credit.

B.

The company parking lot was plowed after a blizzard. A check for $75 was given to the plow truck
operator.

C.

$250 was paid on account.

D.

A customer paid $350 on account.

E.

Provided services for a customer, $500. The customer asked to be billed.

EB16.

3.5 For each of the following items, indicate whether a debit or a credit applies.

A.

increase in retained earnings

B.

decrease in prepaid rent

C.

increase in dividends

D.

decrease in salaries payable

E.

increase in accounts receivable

F.

decrease in common stock

G.

decrease in prepaid insurance

H. decrease in advertising expense
I.

decrease in unearned service fees

J.

increase in office equipment

EB17.

3.5 Indicate whether each of the following accounts has a normal debit or credit balance.

A.

prepaid landscaping expense

B.

common stock

C.

delivery vans

D.

maintenance expense

E.

retained earnings

F.

office supplies

G.

revenue earned

H. accounts payable
I.

unearned painting revenue

J.

interest payable

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EB18.

3.5 Krespy Corp. has a cash balance of $7,500 before the following transactions occur:

A.

received customer payments of $965

B.

supplies purchased on account $435

C.

services worth $850 performed, 25% is paid in cash the rest will be billed

D.

corporation pays $275 for an ad in the newspaper

E.

bill is received for electricity used $235.

F.

dividends of $2,500 are distributed

What is the balance in cash after these transactions are journalized and posted?
EB19.

3.5 A business has the following transactions:

A.

The business is started by receiving cash from an investor in exchange for common stock $10,000.

B.

Rent of $1,250 is paid for the first month.

C.

Office supplies are purchased for $375.

D.

Services worth $3,450 are performed. Cash is received for half.

E.

Customers pay $1,250 for services to be performed next month.

F.

$6,000 is paid for a one year insurance policy.

G.

We receive 25% of the money owed by customers in “D”.

H. A customer has placed an order for $475 of services to be done this coming week.
How much total revenue does the company have?
EB20.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions.

A.

November 19, purchased merchandise inventory, on account, $12,000

B.

November 29, paid creditor for part of November 19 purchase, $10,000

EB21.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions:

A.

December 1, collected balance due from customer account, $5,500

B.

December 12, paid creditors for supplies purchased last month, $4,200

C.

December 31, paid cash dividend to stockholders, $1,000

EB22.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions:

A.

October 9, issued common stock in exchange for building, $40,000

B.

October 12, purchased supplies on account, $3,600

C.

October 24, paid cash dividend to stockholders, $2,500

EB23.

3.5 Post the following August transactions to T-accounts for Accounts Payable and Supplies,

indicating the ending balance (assume no beginning balances in these accounts):
A.

purchased supplies on account, $600

B.

paid vendors for supplies delivered earlier in month, $500

C.

purchased supplies for cash, $450

EB24.

3.5 Post the following July transactions to T-accounts for Accounts Receivable and Cash, indicating

the ending balance (assume no beginning balances in these accounts):
A.

sold products to customers for cash, $8,500

B.

sold products to customers on account, $2,900

C.

collected cash from customer accounts, $1,600

195

196

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

EB25.

3.6 Prepare an unadjusted trial balance, in correct format, from the alphabetized account

information as follows. Assume all accounts have normal balances.

Problem Set A
PA1.

3.1 For each of the following situations write the principle, assumption, or concept that justifies or

explains what occurred.
A.

A landscaper received a customer’s order and cash prepayment to install sod at a house that would not
be ready for installation until March of next year. The owner should record the revenue from the
customer order in March of next year, not in December of this year.

B.

A company divides its income statements into four quarters for the year.

C.

Land is purchased for $205,000 cash; the land is reported on the balance sheet of the purchaser at
$205,000.

D.

Brandy’s Flower Shop is forecasting its balance sheet for the next five years.

E.

When preparing financials for a company, the owner makes sure that the expense transactions are
kept separate from expenses of the other company that he owns.

F.

A company records the expenses incurred to generate the revenues reported.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

197

PA2.

3.2 Assuming the following account balances, what is the missing value?

PA3.

3.2

3.4 Assuming the following account balance changes for the period, what is the missing value?

PA4.

3.2

3.4 Assuming the following account balance changes for the period, what is the missing value?

PA5.

3.2

3.4 Identify the financial statement on which each of the following account categories would

appear: the balance sheet (BS), the income statement (IS), or the retained earnings statement (RE). Indicate
the normal balance (Dr for debit; Cr for credit) for each account category.

Financial statement
Assets
Common stock
Dividends
Expenses
Liabilities
Revenue
Table 3.16

Normal balance

198

PA6.

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

3.4 Indicate what impact (+ for increase; – for decrease) the following transactions would have on the

accounting equation, Assets = Liabilities + Equity.

Impact 1
A.

Issued stock for cash

B.

Purchased supplies on account

C.

Paid employee salaries

D.

Paid note payment to bank

E.

Collected balance on accounts receivable

Impact 2

Table 3.17
PA7.

3.4 Indicate how changes in the following types of accounts would be recorded (Dr for debit; Cr for

credit).

Increase
A.

Asset accounts

B.

Liability accounts

C.

Common stock

D.

Revenue

E.

Expense

Table 3.18

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Decrease

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

PA8.

199

3.4 Identify the normal balance (Dr for Debit; Cr for Credit) and type of account (A for asset, L for

liability, E for equity, E-rev for revenue, E-exp for expense, and E-eq for equity) for each of the following items.

Normal balance
A.

Accounts Payable

B.

Supplies

C.

Inventory

D.

Common Stock

E.

Dividends

F.

Salaries Expense

Account type

Table 3.19
PA9.

3.4 Indicate the net effect (+ for increase; – for decrease; 0 for no effect) of each of the following

transactions on each part of the accounting equation, Assets = Liabilities + Equity. For example, for payment of
an accounts payable balance, A (–) = L (–) + E (0).
A.

sale of merchandise to customer on account

B.

payment on note payable

C.

purchase of equipment for cash

D.

collection of accounts receivable

E.

purchase of supplies on account

PA10.

3.4 Identify whether the following transactions would be recorded with a debit (Dr) or credit (Cr)

entry. Indicate the normal balance of the account.

Transaction
A.

Equipment increase

B.

Dividends Paid increase

C.

Repairs Expense increase

D.

Service revenue decrease

E.

Miscellaneous Expense increase

F.

Bonds Payable decrease

Table 3.20

Debit or credit?

Normal balance

200

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

PA11.

3.5 The following information is provided for the first month of operations for Legal Services Inc.:

A.

The business was started by selling $100,000 worth of common stock.

B.

Six months’ rent was paid in advance, $4,500.

C.

Provided services in the amount of $1,000. The customer will pay at a later date.

D.

An office worker was hired. The worker will be paid $275 per week.

E.

Received $500 in payment from the customer in “C”.

F.

Purchased $250 worth of supplies on credit.

G.

Received the electricity bill. We will pay the $110 in thirty days.

H. Paid the worker hired in “D” for one week’s work.
I.

Received $100 from a customer for services we will provide next week.

J.

Dividends in the amount of $1,500 were distributed.

Prepare the necessary journal entries to record these transactions. If an entry is not required for any of these
transactions, state this and explain why.
PA12.
A.

3.5 Sewn for You had the following transactions in its first week of business.
Jessica Johansen started Sewn for You, a seamstress business, by contributing $20,000 and receiving
stock in exchange.

B.

Paid $2,250 to cover the first three months’ rent.

C.

Purchased $500 of sewing supplies. She paid cash for the purchase.

D.

Purchased a sewing machine for $1,500 paying $200 cash and signing a note for the balance.

E.

Finished a job for a customer earning $180. The customer paid cash.

F.

Received a $500 down payment to make a wedding dress.

G.

Received an electric bill for $125 which is due to be paid in three weeks.

H. Completed an altering job for $45. The customer asked to be billed.
Prepare the necessary journal entries to record these transactions. If an entry is not required for any of these
transactions, state this and explain why.
PA13.

3.5 George Hoskin started his own business, Hoskin Hauling. The following transactions occurred in

the first two weeks:
A.

George Hoskin contributed cash of $12,000 and a truck worth $10,000 to start the business. He
received Common Stock in return.

B.

Paid two months' rent in advance, $800.

C.

Agreed to do a hauling job for a price of $1,200.

D.

Performed the hauling job discussed in “C.” We will get paid later.

E.

Received payment of $600 on the hauling job done in “D.”

F.

Purchased gasoline on credit, $50.

G.

Performed another hauling job. Earned $750, was paid cash.

Record the following transactions in T-accounts. Label each entry with the appropriate letter. Total the Taccounts when you are done.
PA14.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions. Create a T-account for Cash, post any

entries that affect the account, and calculate the ending balance for the account. Assume a Cash beginning
balance of $16,333.
A.

February 2, issued stock to shareholders, for cash, $25,000

B.

March 10, paid cash to purchase equipment, $16,000

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

PA15.

201

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions. Create a T-account for Accounts

Payable, post any entries that affect the account, and tally ending balance for the account. Assume an
Accounts Payable beginning balance of $5,000.
A.

February 2, purchased an asset, merchandise inventory, on account, $30,000

B.

March 10, paid creditor for part of February purchase, $12,000

PA16.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions for the month of July:

A.

on first day of the month, paid rent for current month, $2,000

B.

on tenth day of month, paid prior month balance due on accounts, $3,100

C.

on twelfth day of month, collected cash for services provided, $5,500

D.

on twenty-first day of month, paid salaries to employees, $3,600

E.

on thirty-first day of month, paid for dividends to shareholders, $800

PA17.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions for the month of November:

A.

on first day of the month, issued common stock for cash, $20,000

B.

on third day of month, purchased equipment for cash, $10,500

C.

on tenth day of month, received cash for accounting services, $14,250

D.

on fifteenth day of month, paid miscellaneous expenses, $3,200

E.

on last day of month, paid employee salaries, $8,600

PA18.

3.5 Post the following July transactions to T-accounts for Accounts Receivable, Sales Revenue, and

Cash, indicating the ending balance. Assume no beginning balances in these accounts.
A.

on first day of the month, sold products to customers for cash, $13,660

B.

on fifth day of month, sold products to customers on account, $22,100

C.

on tenth day of month, collected cash from customer accounts, $18,500

PA19.

3.5 Post the following November transactions to T-accounts for Accounts Payable, Inventory, and

Cash, indicating the ending balance. Assume no beginning balances in Accounts Payable and Inventory, and a
beginning Cash balance of $36,500.
A.

purchased merchandise inventory on account, $16,000

B.

paid vendors for part of inventory purchased earlier in month, $12,000

C.

purchased merchandise inventory for cash, $10,500

PA20.

3.6 Prepare an unadjusted trial balance, in correct format, from the following alphabetized account

information. Assume accounts have normal balances.

202

PA21.

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

3.6 Prepare an unadjusted trial balance, in correct format, from the following alphabetized account

information. Assume all the accounts have normal balances.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

B

203

Problem Set B

PB1.

3.2 Assuming the following account balances, what is the missing value?

PB2.

3.2

3.4 Assuming the following account balance changes for the period, what is the missing value?

PB3.

3.2

3.4 Assuming the following account balance changes for the period, what is the missing value?

PB4.

3.2

3.4 Identify the financial statement on which each of the following account categories would

appear: the balance sheet (BS), the income statement (IS), or the retained earnings statement (RE).

Financial statement
Accounts Receivable
Automobile Expense
Cash
Equipment
Notes Payable
Service Revenue
Table 3.21

Normal balance

204

PB5.

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

3.4 Indicate what impact (+ for increase; – for decrease) the following transactions would have on the

accounting equation, Assets = Liabilities + Equity.

Transaction
A.

Paid balance due for accounts payable

B.

Charged clients for legal services provided

C.

Purchased supplies on account

D.

Collected legal service fees from clients for current month

E.

Issued stock in exchange for a note receivable

Impact 1

Impact 2

Table 3.22
PB6.

3.4 Indicate how changes in these types of accounts would be recorded (Dr for debit; Cr for credit).

Debit or credit?
A.

Asset accounts

B.

Liability accounts

C.

Common Stock

D.

Revenue

E.

Expense

Table 3.23

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

PB7.

205

3.4 Identify the normal balance (Dr for Debit; Cr for Credit) and type of account (A for asset, L for

liability, E for equity, E-rev for revenue, E-exp for expense, and E-eq for equity) for each of the following
accounts.

Normal balance
A.

Utility Expense

B.

Accounts Receivable

C.

Interest Revenue

D.

Retained Earnings

E.

Land

F.

Sales Revenue

Account type

Table 3.24
PB8.

3.4 Indicate the net effect (+ for increase; – for decrease; 0 for no effect) of each of the following

transactions on each part of the accounting equation, Assets = Liabilities + Equity. For example, for payment of
an accounts payable balance, A (–) = L (–) + E (0).
A.

Payment of principal balance of note payable

B.

Purchase of supplies for cash

C.

Payment of dividends to stockholders

D.

Issuance of stock for cash

E.

Billing customer for physician services provided

PB9.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions. Create a T-account for Cash, post any

entries that affect the account, and calculate the ending balance for the account. Assume a Cash beginning
balance of $37,400.
A.

May 12, collected balance due from customers on account, $16,000

B.

June 10, purchased supplies for cash, $4,444

PB10.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions. Create a T-account for Accounts

Payable, post any entries that affect the account, and calculate the ending balance for the account. Assume an
Accounts Payable beginning balance of $7,500.
A.

May 12, purchased merchandise inventory on account. $9,200

B.

June 10, paid creditor for part of previous month’s purchase, $11,350

PB11.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions that occurred in April:

A.

on first day of the month, issued common stock for cash, $15,000

B.

on eighth day of month, purchased supplies, on account, $1,800

C.

on twentieth day of month, billed customer for services provided, $950

D.

on twenty-fifth day of month, paid salaries to employees, $2,000

E.

on thirtieth day of month, paid for dividends to shareholders, $500

206

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

PB12.

3.5 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions that occurred in March:

A.

on first day of the month, purchased building for cash, $75,000

B.

on fourth day of month, purchased inventory, on account, $6,875

C.

on eleventh day of month, billed customer for services provided, $8,390

D.

on nineteenth day of month, paid current month utility bill, $2,000

E.

on last day of month, paid suppliers for previous purchases, $2,850

PB13.

3.5 Post the following November transactions to T-accounts for Accounts Payable, Inventory, and

Cash, indicating the ending balance. Assume no beginning balances in Accounts Payable and Inventory, and a
beginning Cash balance of $21,220.
A.

purchased merchandise inventory on account, $9,900

B.

paid vendors for part of inventory purchased earlier in month, $6,500

C.

purchased merchandise inventory for cash, $4,750

PB14.

3.5 Post the following July transactions to T-accounts for Accounts Receivable, Sales Revenue, and

Cash, indicating the ending balance. Assume no beginning balances in these accounts.
A.

sold products to customers for cash, $7,500

B.

sold products to customers on account, $12,650

C.

collected cash from customer accounts, $9,500

PB15.

3.6 Prepare an unadjusted trial balance, in correct format, from the following alphabetized account

information. Assume all accounts have normal balances.

PB16.

3.6 Prepare an unadjusted trial balance, in correct format, from the following alphabetized account

information. Assume all accounts have normal balances.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

PB17.

207

3.6 Prepare an unadjusted trial balance, in correct format, from the following alphabetized account

information. Assume all accounts have normal balances.

PB18.

3.6 Prepare an unadjusted trial balance, in correct format, from the following alphabetized account

information. Assume all accounts have normal balances.

Thought Provokers
TP1.

3.1 Is it possible to be too conservative? Explain your answer.

TP2.

3.1 Why is it important to learn all of this terminology when accounting is a quantitative subject?

TP3.

3.2 Assume that you are the controller of a business that provides legal services to clients. Suppose

that the company has had a tough year, so the revenues have been lagging behind, based on previous years’
standards. What would you do if your boss (the chief executive officer [CEO] of the company) asked to
reclassify a transaction to report loan proceeds of $150,000 as if the cash came from service fee revenue from
clients instead. Would following the CEO’s advice impact the company’s accounting equation? How would
reclassifying this one transaction change the outcome of the balance sheet, the income statement, and the
statement of retained earnings? Would making this reclassification change the perception that users of the
financial statements would have of the company’s current year success and future year potential?
Write a memo, detailing your willingness (or not) to embrace this suggestion, giving reasons behind your
decision. Remember to exercise diplomacy, even if you must dissent from the opinion of a supervisor. Note
that the challenge of the assignment is to keep your integrity intact, while also keeping your job, if possible.

208

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

TP4.

3.2 Visit the website of the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) (https://www.sec.gov/

edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html). Search for the latest Form 10-K for a company you would like to
analyze. Submit a short memo that
A.

Includes the name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen.

B.

Reviews the company’s end-of-period Balance Sheet to determine the following:
i. total assets
ii. total liabilities
iii. total equity

C.

Presents the company’s accounting equation at the end of the period, from the information you
collected in (A), (B), and (C):
i. provide the web link to the company’s Form 10-K to allow accurate verification of your answers

TP5.

3.3 Is the order in which we place information in the journal and ledger important?

TP6.

3.4 Visit the website of the SEC (https://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html).

Search for the latest Form 10-K for a company you would like to analyze. Submit a short memo that
A.

Includes the name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen

B.

Reviews the company’s comparative Balance Sheet to gather the following information:
i. Compare beginning and ending Assets totals, noting amount of change for the most recent
period
ii. Compare beginning and ending Liabilities totals, noting amount of change for the most recent
period
iii. Compare beginning and ending Equity totals, noting amount of change for the most recent
period

C.

State the changes identified in (A), (B), and (C) in accounting equation format. If the “change” equation
does not balance, explain why not. Hint: Double-check your calculations, and if the accounting
equation change still does not balance, search for notes in the company’s files about prior period
adjustments, which will often explain why balances may differ.
i. Provide the web link to the company’s Form 10-K to allow accurate verification of your answers.

TP7.

3.5 Visit the website of the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) (https://www.sec.gov/

edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html). Search for the latest Form 10-K for a company you would like to.
When you are choosing, make sure the company sells a product (has inventory on the Balance Sheet, and Cost
of Goods Sold on the Income Statement). Submit a short memo:
A.

Include the name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen.

B.

Follow the financial statement progression from the Income Statement to the Retained Earnings
Statement to the Balance Sheet. Find the net income amount from the Income Statement and identify
where it appears on the Statement of Retained Earnings (or the Statement of Stockholders’ Equity).

C.

On the statement found for instruction (A), find the ending retained earnings balance, and identify
where it appears on the Balance Sheet for year-end.

D.

Provide the web link to the company’s Form 10-K to allow accurate verification of your answers.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

TP8.

209

3.6 Analyze Trusty Company’s trial balance and the additional information provided to determine the

following:
A.

what is causing the trial balance to be out of balance

B.

any other errors that require corrections that are identified during your analysis

C.

the effect (if any) that correcting the errors will have on the accounting equation

A review of transactions revealed the following facts:
• A service fee of $18,000 was earned (but not yet collected) by the end of the period but was accidentally
not recorded as revenue at that time.
• A transposition error occurred when transferring the account balances from the ledger to the trial
balance. Salaries expense should have been listed on the trial balance as $64,500 but was inadvertently
recorded as $46,500.
• Two machines that cost $9,000 each were purchased on account but were not recorded in company
accounting records.

210

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 3 Analyzing and Recording Transactions

4

The Adjustment Process
Figure 4.1 Mark’s Dry-Cleaning Business. (credit: modification of “Dry Cleaning” by Donald West/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

Chapter Outline
4.1 Explain the Concepts and Guidelines Affecting Adjusting Entries
4.2 Discuss the Adjustment Process and Illustrate Common Types of Adjusting Entries
4.3 Record and Post the Common Types of Adjusting Entries
4.4 Use the Ledger Balances to Prepare an Adjusted Trial Balance
4.5 Prepare Financial Statements Using the Adjusted Trial Balance

Why It Matters
As we learned in Analyzing and Recording Transactions, upon finishing college Mark Summers wanted to start
his own dry-cleaning business called Supreme Cleaners. After four years, Mark finished college and opened
Supreme Cleaners. During his first month of operations, Mark purchased dry-cleaning equipment and
supplies. He also hired an employee, opened a savings account, and provided services to his first customers,
among other things.
Mark kept thorough records of all of the daily business transactions for the month. At the end of the month,
Mark reviewed his trial balance and realized that some of the information was not up to date. His equipment
and supplies had been used, making them less valuable. He had not yet paid his employee for work
completed. His business savings account earned interest. Some of his customers had paid in advance for their
dry cleaning, with Mark's business providing the service during the month.
What should Mark do with all of these events? Does he have a responsibility to record these transactions? If
so, how would he go about recording this information? How does it affect his financial statements? Mark will

212

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

have to explore his accounting process to determine if these end-of-period transactions require recording and
adjust his financial statements accordingly. This exploration is performed by taking the next few steps in the
accounting cycle.

4.1

Explain the Concepts and Guidelines Affecting Adjusting Entries

Analyzing and Recording Transactions was the first of three consecutive chapters covering the steps in the
accounting cycle (Figure 4.2).

Figure 4.2

The Basic Accounting Cycle. In this chapter, we examine the next three steps in the accounting

cycle—5, 6, and 7—which cover adjusting entries (journalize and post), preparing an adjusted trial balance, and
preparing the financial statements. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)
In Analyzing and Recording Transactions, we discussed the first four steps in the accounting cycle: identify and
analyze transactions, record transactions to a journal, post journal information to the general ledger, and
prepare an (unadjusted) trial balance. This chapter examines the next three steps in the cycle: record adjusting
entries (journalizing and posting), prepare an adjusted trial balance, and prepare the financial statements
(Figure 4.3).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Figure 4.3

213

Steps 5, 6, and 7 in the Accounting Cycle. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
As we progress through these steps, you learn why the trial balance in this phase of the accounting cycle is
referred to as an “adjusted” trial balance. We also discuss the purpose of adjusting entries and the accounting
concepts supporting their need. One of the first concepts we discuss is accrual accounting.

Accrual Accounting
Public companies reporting their financial positions use either US generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP) or International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), as allowed under the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) regulations. Also, companies, public or private, using US GAAP or IFRS prepare their
financial statements using the rules of accrual accounting. Recall from Introduction to Financial Statements
that accrual basis accounting prescribes that revenues and expenses must be recorded in the accounting
period in which they were earned or incurred, no matter when cash receipts or payments occur. It is because
of accrual accounting that we have the revenue recognition principle and the expense recognition principle (also
known as the matching principle).
The accrual method is considered to better match revenues and expenses and standardizes reporting
information for comparability purposes. Having comparable information is important to external users of
information trying to make investment or lending decisions, and to internal users trying to make decisions
about company performance, budgeting, and growth strategies.
Some nonpublic companies may choose to use cash basis accounting rather than accrual basis accounting to
report financial information. Recall from Introduction to Financial Statements that cash basis accounting is a
method of accounting in which transactions are not recorded in the financial statements until there is an
exchange of cash. Cash basis accounting sometimes delays or accelerates revenue and expense reporting until
cash receipts or outlays occur. With this method, cash flows are used to measure business performance in a
given period and can be simpler to track than accrual basis accounting.
There are several other accounting methods or concepts that accountants will sometimes apply. The first is
modified accrual accounting, which is commonly used in governmental accounting and merges accrual basis
and cash basis accounting. The second is tax basis accounting that is used in establishing the tax effects of
transactions in determining the tax liability of an organization.
One fundamental concept to consider related to the accounting cycle—and to accrual accounting in
particular—is the idea of the accounting period.

The Accounting Period
As we discussed, accrual accounting requires companies to report revenues and expenses in the accounting
period in which they were earned or incurred. An accounting period breaks down company financial
information into specific time spans, and can cover a month, a quarter, a half-year, or a full year. Public
companies governed by GAAP are required to present quarterly (three-month) accounting period financial

214

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

statements called 10-Qs. However, most public and private companies keep monthly, quarterly, and yearly
(annual) period information. This is useful to users needing up-to-date financial data to make decisions about
company investment and growth. When the company keeps yearly information, the year could be based on a
fiscal or calendar year. This is explained shortly.

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Adjustment Process for Grocery Stores
In every industry, adjustment entries are made at the end of the period to ensure revenue matches
expenses. Companies with an online presence need to account for items sold that have not yet been
shipped or are in the process of reaching the end user. But what about the grocery industry? At first
glance, it might seem that no such adjustment entries are necessary. However, grocery stores have
adapted to the current retail environment. For example, your local grocery store might provide catering
services for a graduation party. If the contract requires the customer to put down a 50% deposit, and
occurs near the end of a period, the grocery store will have unearned revenue until it provides the
catering service. Once the party occurs, the grocery store needs to make an adjusting entry to reflect that
revenue has been earned.

The Fiscal Year and the Calendar Year
A company may choose its yearly reporting period to be based on a calendar or fiscal year. If a company uses
a calendar year, it is reporting financial data from January 1 to December 31 of a specific year. This may be
useful for businesses needing to coincide with a traditional yearly tax schedule. It can also be easier to track
for some businesses without formal reconciliation practices, and for small businesses.
A fiscal year is a twelve-month reporting cycle that can begin in any month and records financial data for that
consecutive twelve-month period. For example, a business may choose its fiscal year to begin on April 1, 2019,
and end on March 31, 2020. This can be common practice for corporations and may best reflect the
operational flow of revenues and expenses for a particular business. In addition to annual reporting,
companies often need or choose to report financial statement information in interim periods.

Interim Periods
An interim period is any reporting period shorter than a full year (fiscal or calendar). This can encompass
monthly, quarterly, or half-year statements. The information contained on these statements is timelier than
waiting for a yearly accounting period to end. The most common interim period is three months, or a quarter.
For companies whose common stock is traded on a major stock exchange, meaning these are publicly traded
companies, quarterly statements must be filed with the SEC on a Form 10-Q. The companies must file a Form
10-K for their annual statements. As you’ve learned, the SEC is an independent agency of the federal
government that provides oversight of public companies to maintain fair representation of company financial
activities for investors to make informed decisions.
In order for information to be useful to the user, it must be timely—that is, the user has to get it quickly
enough so it is relevant to decision-making. You may recall from Analyzing and Recording Transactions that

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

215

this is the basis of the time period assumption in accounting. For example, a potential or existing investor
wants timely information by which to measure the performance of the company, and to help decide whether
to invest, to stay invested, or to sell their stockholdings and invest elsewhere. This requires companies to
organize their information and break it down into shorter periods. Internal and external users can then rely on
the information that is both timely and relevant to decision-making.
The accounting period a company chooses to use for financial reporting will impact the types of adjustments
they may have to make to certain accounts.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Illegal Cookie Jar Accounting Used to Manage Earnings
From 2000 through the end of 2001, Bristol-Myers Squibb engaged in “Cookie Jar Accounting,” resulting
in $150 million in SEC fines. The company manipulated its accounting to create a false indication of
income and growth to create the appearance that it was meeting its own targets and Wall Street
analysts’ earnings estimates during the years 2000 and 2001. The SEC describes some of what occurred:
Bristol-Myers inflated its results primarily by (1) stuffing its distribution channels with excess
inventory near the end of every quarter in amounts sufficient to meet its targets by making
pharmaceutical sales to its wholesalers ahead of demand; and (2) improperly recognizing $1.5
billion in revenue from such pharmaceutical sales to its two biggest wholesalers. In connection
with the $1.5 billion in revenue, Bristol-Myers covered these wholesalers’ carrying costs and
guaranteed them a return on investment until they sold the products. When Bristol-Myers
recognized the $1.5 billion in revenue upon shipment, it did so contrary to generally accepted
[1]
accounting principles.
In addition to the improper distribution of product to manipulate earnings numbers, which was not
enough to meet earnings targets, the company improperly used divestiture reserve funds (a “cookie jar”
fund that is funded by the sale of assets such as product lines or divisions) to meet those targets. In this
circumstance, earnings management was considered illegal, costing the company millions of dollars in
fines.

4.2

Discuss the Adjustment Process and Illustrate Common Types of

Adjusting Entries
When a company reaches the end of a period, it must update certain accounts that have either been left
unattended throughout the period or have not yet been recognized. Adjusting entries update accounting
records at the end of a period for any transactions that have not yet been recorded. One important accounting
principle to remember is that just as the accounting equation (Assets = Liabilities + Owner’s equity/or common
stock/or capital) must be equal, it must remain equal after you make adjusting entries. Also note that in this
equation, owner’s equity represents an individual owner (sole proprietorship), common stock represents a
corporation’s owners’ interests, and capital represents a partnership’s owners’ interests. We discuss the
effects of adjusting entries in greater detail throughout this chapter.
1 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “Bristol-Myers Squibb Company Agrees to Pay $150 Million to Settle Fraud Charges.” August 4,
2004. https://www.sec.gov/news/press/2004-105.htm

216

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

There are several steps in the accounting cycle that require the preparation of a trial balance: step 4, preparing
an unadjusted trial balance; step 6, preparing an adjusted trial balance; and step 9, preparing a post-closing
trial balance. You might question the purpose of more than one trial balance. For example, why can we not go
from the unadjusted trial balance straight into preparing financial statements for public consumption? What is
the purpose of the adjusted trial balance? Does preparing more than one trial balance mean the company
made a mistake earlier in the accounting cycle? To answer these questions, let’s first explore the (unadjusted)
trial balance, and why some accounts have incorrect balances.

Why Some Accounts Have Incorrect Balances on the Trial Balance
The unadjusted trial balance may have incorrect balances in some accounts. Recall the trial balance from
Analyzing and Recording Transactions for the example company, Printing Plus.

Figure 4.4

Unadjusted Trial Balance for Printing Plus. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The trial balance for Printing Plus shows Supplies of $500, which were purchased on January 30. Since this is a
new company, Printing Plus would more than likely use some of their supplies right away, before the end of
the month on January 31. Supplies are only an asset when they are unused. If Printing Plus used some of its
supplies immediately on January 30, then why is the full $500 still in the supply account on January 31? How do
we fix this incorrect balance?
Similarly, what about Unearned Revenue? On January 9, the company received $4,000 from a customer for
printing services to be performed. The company recorded this as a liability because it received payment
without providing the service. To clear this liability, the company must perform the service. Assume that as of
January 31 some of the printing services have been provided. Is the full $4,000 still a liability? Since a portion of
the service was provided, a change to unearned revenue should occur. The company needs to correct this
balance in the Unearned Revenue account.
Having incorrect balances in Supplies and in Unearned Revenue on the company’s January 31 trial balance is
not due to any error on the company’s part. The company followed all of the correct steps of the accounting
cycle up to this point. So why are the balances still incorrect?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

217

Journal entries are recorded when an activity or event occurs that triggers the entry. Usually the trigger is from
an original source. Recall that an original source can be a formal document substantiating a transaction, such
as an invoice, purchase order, cancelled check, or employee time sheet. Not every transaction produces an
original source document that will alert the bookkeeper that it is time to make an entry.
When a company purchases supplies, the original order, receipt of the supplies, and receipt of the invoice from
the vendor will all trigger journal entries. This trigger does not occur when using supplies from the supply
closet. Similarly, for unearned revenue, when the company receives an advance payment from the customer
for services yet provided, the cash received will trigger a journal entry. When the company provides the
printing services for the customer, the customer will not send the company a reminder that revenue has now
been earned. Situations such as these are why businesses need to make adjusting entries.

THINK IT THROUGH
Keep Calm and Adjust . . .
Elliot Simmons owns a small law firm. He does the accounting himself and uses an accrual basis for
accounting. At the end of his first month, he reviews his records and realizes there are a few inaccuracies
on this unadjusted trial balance.
One difference is the supplies account; the figure on paper does not match the value of the supplies
inventory still available. Another difference was interest earned from his bank account. He did not have
anything recognizing these earnings.
Why did his unadjusted trial balance have these errors? What can be attributed to the differences in
supply figures? What can be attributed to the differences in interest earned?

The Need for Adjusting Entries
Adjusting entries update accounting records at the end of a period for any transactions that have not yet been
recorded. These entries are necessary to ensure the income statement and balance sheet present the correct,
up-to-date numbers. Adjusting entries are also necessary because the initial trial balance may not contain
complete and current data due to several factors:
• The inefficiency of recording every single day-to-day event, such as the use of supplies.
• Some costs are not recorded during the period but must be recognized at the end of the period, such as
depreciation, rent, and insurance.
• Some items are forthcoming for which original source documents have not yet been received, such as a
utility bill.
There are a few other guidelines that support the need for adjusting entries.

Guidelines Supporting Adjusting Entries
Several guidelines support the need for adjusting entries:
• Revenue recognition principle: Adjusting entries are necessary because the revenue recognition principle

218

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

requires revenue recognition when earned, thus the need for an update to unearned revenues.
• Expense recognition (matching) principle: This requires matching expenses incurred to generate the
revenues earned, which affects accounts such as insurance expense and supplies expense.
• Time period assumption: This requires useful information be presented in shorter time periods such as
years, quarters, or months. This means a company must recognize revenues and expenses in the proper
period, requiring adjustment to certain accounts to meet these criteria.
The required adjusting entries depend on what types of transactions the company has, but there are some
common types of adjusting entries. Before we look at recording and posting the most common types of
adjusting entries, we briefly discuss the various types of adjusting entries.

Types of Adjusting Entries
Adjusting entries requires updates to specific account types at the end of the period. Not all accounts require
updates, only those not naturally triggered by an original source document. There are two main types of
adjusting entries that we explore further, deferrals and accruals.

Deferrals
Deferrals are prepaid expense and revenue accounts that have delayed recognition until they have been used
or earned. This recognition may not occur until the end of a period or future periods. When deferred expenses
and revenues have yet to be recognized, their information is stored on the balance sheet. As soon as the
expense is incurred and the revenue is earned, the information is transferred from the balance sheet to the
income statement. Two main types of deferrals are prepaid expenses and unearned revenues.

Prepaid Expenses
Recall from Analyzing and Recording Transactions that prepaid expenses (prepayments) are assets for which
advanced payment has occurred, before the company can benefit from use. As soon as the asset has provided
benefit to the company, the value of the asset used is transferred from the balance sheet to the income
statement as an expense. Some common examples of prepaid expenses are supplies, depreciation, insurance,
and rent.
When a company purchases supplies, it may not use all supplies immediately, but chances are the company
has used some of the supplies by the end of the period. It is not worth it to record every time someone uses a
pencil or piece of paper during the period, so at the end of the period, this account needs to be updated for
the value of what has been used.
Let’s say a company paid for supplies with cash in the amount of $400. At the end of the month, the company
took an inventory of supplies used and determined the value of those supplies used during the period to be
$150. The following entry occurs for the initial payment.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

219

Supplies increases (debit) for $400, and Cash decreases (credit) for $400. When the company recognizes the
supplies usage, the following adjusting entry occurs.

Supplies Expense is an expense account, increasing (debit) for $150, and Supplies is an asset account,
decreasing (credit) for $150. This means $150 is transferred from the balance sheet (asset) to the income
statement (expense). Notice that not all of the supplies are used. There is still a balance of $250 (400 – 150) in
the Supplies account. This amount will carry over to future periods until used. The balances in the Supplies and
Supplies Expense accounts show as follows.

Depreciation may also require an adjustment at the end of the period. Recall that depreciation is the systematic
method to record the allocation of cost over a given period of certain assets. This allocation of cost is recorded
over the useful life of the asset, or the time period over which an asset cost is allocated. The allocated cost up
to that point is recorded in Accumulated Depreciation, a contra asset account. A contra account is an account
paired with another account type, has an opposite normal balance to the paired account, and reduces the
balance in the paired account at the end of a period.
Accumulated Depreciation is contrary to an asset account, such as Equipment. This means that the normal
balance for Accumulated Depreciation is on the credit side. It houses all depreciation expensed in current and
prior periods. Accumulated Depreciation will reduce the asset account for depreciation incurred up to that
point. The difference between the asset’s value (cost) and accumulated depreciation is called the book value
of the asset. When depreciation is recorded in an adjusting entry, Accumulated Depreciation is credited and
Depreciation Expense is debited.
For example, let’s say a company pays $2,000 for equipment that is supposed to last four years. The company
wants to depreciate the asset over those four years equally. This means the asset will lose $500 in value each
year ($2,000/four years). In the first year, the company would record the following adjusting entry to show
depreciation of the equipment.

Depreciation Expense increases (debit) and Accumulated Depreciation, Equipment, increases (credit). If the
company wanted to compute the book value, it would take the original cost of the equipment and subtract
accumulated depreciation.

220

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Book value of equipment = $2,000 – $500 = $1,500
This means that the current book value of the equipment is $1,500, and depreciation will be subtracted from
this figure the next year. The following account balances after adjustment are as follows:

You will learn more about depreciation and its computation in Long-Term Assets. However, one important fact
that we need to address now is that the book value of an asset is not necessarily the price at which the asset
would sell. For example, you might have a building for which you paid $1,000,000 that currently has been
depreciated to a book value of $800,000. However, today it could sell for more than, less than, or the same as
its book value. The same is true about just about any asset you can name, except, perhaps, cash itself.
Insurance policies can require advanced payment of fees for several months at a time, six months, for
example. The company does not use all six months of insurance immediately but over the course of the six
months. At the end of each month, the company needs to record the amount of insurance expired during that
month.
For example, a company pays $4,500 for an insurance policy covering six months. It is the end of the first
month and the company needs to record an adjusting entry to recognize the insurance used during the
month. The following entries show the initial payment for the policy and the subsequent adjusting entry for
one month of insurance usage.

In the first entry, Cash decreases (credit) and Prepaid Insurance increases (debit) for $4,500. In the second
entry, Prepaid Insurance decreases (credit) and Insurance Expense increases (debit) for one month’s
insurance usage found by taking the total $4,500 and dividing by six months (4,500/6 = 750). The account
balances after adjustment are as follows:

Similar to prepaid insurance, rent also requires advanced payment. Usually to rent a space, a company will
need to pay rent at the beginning of the month. The company may also enter into a lease agreement that
requires several months, or years, of rent in advance. Each month that passes, the company needs to record

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

221

rent used for the month.
Let’s say a company pays $8,000 in advance for four months of rent. After the first month, the company
records an adjusting entry for the rent used. The following entries show initial payment for four months of
rent and the adjusting entry for one month’s usage.

In the first entry, Cash decreases (credit) and Prepaid Rent increases (debit) for $8,000. In the second entry,
Prepaid Rent decreases (credit) and Rent Expense increases (debit) for one month’s rent usage found by
taking the total $8,000 and dividing by four months (8,000/4 = 2,000). The account balances after adjustment
are as follows:

Another type of deferral requiring adjustment is unearned revenue.

Unearned Revenues
Recall that unearned revenue represents a customer’s advanced payment for a product or service that has yet
to be provided by the company. Since the company has not yet provided the product or service, it cannot
recognize the customer’s payment as revenue. At the end of a period, the company will review the account to
see if any of the unearned revenue has been earned. If so, this amount will be recorded as revenue in the
current period.
For example, let’s say the company is a law firm. During the year, it collected retainer fees totaling $48,000
from clients. Retainer fees are money lawyers collect in advance of starting work on a case. When the company
collects this money from its clients, it will debit cash and credit unearned fees. Even though not all of the
$48,000 was probably collected on the same day, we record it as if it was for simplicity’s sake.

In this case, Unearned Fee Revenue increases (credit) and Cash increases (debit) for $48,000.
At the end of the year after analyzing the unearned fees account, 40% of the unearned fees have been earned.

222

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

This 40% can now be recorded as revenue. Total revenue recorded is $19,200 ($48,000 × 40%).

For this entry, Unearned Fee Revenue decreases (debit) and Fee Revenue increases (credit) for $19,200, which
is the 40% earned during the year. The company will have the following balances in the two accounts:

Besides deferrals, other types of adjusting entries include accruals.

Accruals
Accruals are types of adjusting entries that accumulate during a period, where amounts were previously
unrecorded. The two specific types of adjustments are accrued revenues and accrued expenses.

Accrued Revenues
Accrued revenues are revenues earned in a period but have yet to be recorded, and no money has been
collected. Some examples include interest, and services completed but a bill has yet to be sent to the
customer.
Interest can be earned from bank account holdings, notes receivable, and some accounts receivables
(depending on the contract). Interest had been accumulating during the period and needs to be adjusted to
reflect interest earned at the end of the period. Note that this interest has not been paid at the end of the
period, only earned. This aligns with the revenue recognition principle to recognize revenue when earned,
even if cash has yet to be collected.
For example, assume that a company has one outstanding note receivable in the amount of $100,000. Interest
on this note is 5% per year. Three months have passed, and the company needs to record interest earned on
this outstanding loan. The calculation for the interest revenue earned is $100,000 × 5% × 3/12 = $1,250. The
following adjusting entry occurs.

Interest Receivable increases (debit) for $1,250 because interest has not yet been paid. Interest Revenue
increases (credit) for $1,250 because interest was earned in the three-month period but had been previously
unrecorded.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

223

Previously unrecorded service revenue can arise when a company provides a service but did not yet bill the
client for the work. This means the customer has also not yet paid for services. Since there was no bill to
trigger a transaction, an adjustment is required to recognize revenue earned at the end of the period.
For example, a company performs landscaping services in the amount of $1,500. However, they have not yet
received payment. At the period end, the company would record the following adjusting entry.

Accounts Receivable increases (debit) for $1,500 because the customer has not yet paid for services
completed. Service Revenue increases (credit) for $1,500 because service revenue was earned but had been
previously unrecorded.

Accrued Expenses
Accrued expenses are expenses incurred in a period but have yet to be recorded, and no money has been
paid. Some examples include interest, tax, and salary expenses.
Interest expense arises from notes payable and other loan agreements. The company has accumulated
interest during the period but has not recorded or paid the amount. This creates a liability that the company
must pay at a future date. You cover more details about computing interest in Current Liabilities, so for now
amounts are given.
For example, a company accrued $300 of interest during the period. The following entry occurs at the end of
the period.

224

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Interest Expense increases (debit) and Interest Payable increases (credit) for $300. The following are the
updated ledger balances after posting the adjusting entry.

Taxes are only paid at certain times during the year, not necessarily every month. Taxes the company owes
during a period that are unpaid require adjustment at the end of a period. This creates a liability for the
company. Some tax expense examples are income and sales taxes.
For example, a company has accrued income taxes for the month for $9,000. The company would record the
following adjusting entry.

Income Tax Expense increases (debit) and Income Tax Payable increases (credit) for $9,000. The following are
the updated ledger balances after posting the adjusting entry.

Many salaried employees are paid once a month. The salary the employee earned during the month might not
be paid until the following month. For example, the employee is paid for the prior month’s work on the first of
the next month. The financial statements must remain up to date, so an adjusting entry is needed during the
month to show salaries previously unrecorded and unpaid at the end of the month.
Let’s say a company has five salaried employees, each earning $2,500 per month. In our example, assume that
they do not get paid for this work until the first of the next month. The following is the adjusting journal entry
for salaries.

Salaries Expense increases (debit) and Salaries Payable increases (credit) for $12,500 ($2,500 per employee ×
five employees). The following are the updated ledger balances after posting the adjusting entry.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

225

In Record and Post the Common Types of Adjusting Entries, we explore some of these adjustments specifically
for our company Printing Plus, and show how these entries affect our general ledger (T-accounts).

YOUR TURN
Adjusting Entries

Example

Income Statement Account

Balance Sheet Account

Cash in Entry?

Table 4.1
Review the three adjusting entries that follow. Using the table provided, for each entry write down the
income statement account and balance sheet account used in the adjusting entry in the appropriate
column. Then in the last column answer yes or no.

Solution

Example

Income Statement Account

Balance Sheet Account

Cash in Entry?

1

Supplies expense

Supplies

no

2

Service Revenue

Unearned Revenue

no

Table 4.2

226

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Example
3

Income Statement Account
Rent Expense

Balance Sheet Account

Cash in Entry?

Prepaid machine rent

no

Table 4.2

YOUR TURN
Adjusting Entries Take Two
Did we continue to follow the rules of adjusting entries in these two examples? Explain.

Example

Income Statement Account

Balance Sheet Account

Cash in Entry?

Table 4.3
Solution
Yes, we did. Each entry has one income statement account and one balance sheet account, and cash
does not appear in either of the adjusting entries.

Example

Income Statement Account

Balance Sheet Account

Cash in Entry?

1

Electricity Expense

Accounts Payable

no

2

Salaries Expense

Salaries Payable

no

Table 4.4

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

4.3

227

Record and Post the Common Types of Adjusting Entries

Before beginning adjusting entry examples for Printing Plus, let’s consider some rules governing adjusting
entries:
• Every adjusting entry will have at least one income statement account and one balance sheet account.
• Cash will never be in an adjusting entry.
• The adjusting entry records the change in amount that occurred during the period.
What are “income statement” and “balance sheet” accounts? Income statement accounts include revenues
and expenses. Balance sheet accounts are assets, liabilities, and stockholders’ equity accounts, since they
appear on a balance sheet. The second rule tells us that cash can never be in an adjusting entry. This is true
because paying or receiving cash triggers a journal entry. This means that every transaction with cash will be
recorded at the time of the exchange. We will not get to the adjusting entries and have cash paid or received
which has not already been recorded. If accountants find themselves in a situation where the cash account
must be adjusted, the necessary adjustment to cash will be a correcting entry and not an adjusting entry.
With an adjusting entry, the amount of change occurring during the period is recorded. For example, if the
supplies account had a $300 balance at the beginning of the month and $100 is still available in the supplies
account at the end of the month, the company would record an adjusting entry for the $200 used during the
month (300 – 100). Similarly for unearned revenues, the company would record how much of the revenue was
earned during the period.
Let’s now consider new transaction information for Printing Plus.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Earnings Management
Recording adjusting entries seems so cut and dry. It looks like you just follow the rules and all of the
numbers come out 100 percent correct on all financial statements. But in reality this is not always the
case. Just the fact that you have to make estimates in some cases, such as depreciation estimating
residual value and useful life, tells you that numbers will not be 100 percent correct unless the
accountant has ESP. Some companies engage in something called earnings management, where they
follow the rules of accounting mostly but they stretch the truth a little to make it look like they are more
profitable. Some companies do this by recording revenue before they should. Others leave assets on the
books instead of expensing them when they should to decrease total expenses and increase profit.
Take Mexico-based home-building company Desarrolladora Homex S.A.B. de C.V. This company reported
revenue earned on more than 100,000 homes they had not even build yet. The SEC’s complaint states
that Homex reported revenues from a project site where every planned home was said to have been
“built and sold by Dec. 31, 2011. Satellite images of the project site on March 12, 2012, show it was still
largely undeveloped and the vast majority of supposedly sold homes remained unbuilt.”

[2]

Is managing your earnings illegal? In some situations it is just an unethical stretch of the truth easy
enough to do because of the estimates made in adjusting entries. You can simply change your estimate
and insist the new estimate is really better when maybe it is your way to improve the bottom line, for
example, changing your annual depreciation expense calculated on expensive plant assets from
assuming a ten-year useful life, a reasonable estimated expectation, to a twenty-year useful life, not so

228

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

reasonable but you insist your company will be able to use these assets twenty years while knowing that
is a slim possibility. Doubling the useful life will cause 50% of the depreciation expense you would have
had. This will make a positive impact on net income. This method of earnings management would
probably not be considered illegal but is definitely a breach of ethics. In other situations, companies
manage their earnings in a way that the SEC believes is actual fraud and charges the company with the
illegal activity.

Recording Common Types of Adjusting Entries
Recall the transactions for Printing Plus discussed in Analyzing and Recording Transactions.
Jan. 3, 2019

issues $20,000 shares of common stock for cash

Jan. 5, 2019

purchases equipment on account for $3,500, payment due within the month

Jan. 9, 2019

receives $4,000 cash in advance from a customer for services not yet rendered

Jan. 10, 2019

provides $5,500 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the services

Jan. 12, 2019

pays a $300 utility bill with cash

Jan. 14, 2019

distributed $100 cash in dividends to stockholders

Jan. 17, 2019

receives $2,800 cash from a customer for services rendered

Jan. 18, 2019

paid in full, with cash, for the equipment purchase on January 5

Jan. 20, 2019

paid $3,600 cash in salaries expense to employees

Jan. 23, 2019

received cash payment in full from the customer on the January 10 transaction

Jan. 27, 2019

provides $1,200 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the services

Jan. 30, 2019

purchases supplies on account for $500, payment due within three months

On January 31, 2019, Printing Plus makes adjusting entries for the following transactions.
1. On January 31, Printing Plus took an inventory of its supplies and discovered that $100 of supplies had
been used during the month.
2. The equipment purchased on January 5 depreciated $75 during the month of January.
3. Printing Plus performed $600 of services during January for the customer from the January 9 transaction.
4. Reviewing the company bank statement, Printing Plus discovers $140 of interest earned during the month
of January that was previously uncollected and unrecorded.
5. Employees earned $1,500 in salaries for the period of January 21–January 31 that had been previously
unpaid and unrecorded.
We now record the adjusting entries from January 31, 2019, for Printing Plus.
Transaction 13: On January 31, Printing Plus took an inventory of its supplies and discovered that $100 of
supplies had been used during the month.

2 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “SEC Charges Mexico-Based Homebuilder in $3.3 Billion Accounting Fraud. Press Release.” March
3, 2017. https://www.sec.gov/news/pressrelease/2017-60.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

229

Analysis:
• $100 of supplies were used during January. Supplies is an asset that is decreasing (credit).
• Supplies is a type of prepaid expense that, when used, becomes an expense. Supplies Expense would
increase (debit) for the $100 of supplies used during January.

Impact on the financial statements: Supplies is a balance sheet account, and Supplies Expense is an income
statement account. This satisfies the rule that each adjusting entry will contain an income statement and
balance sheet account. We see total assets decrease by $100 on the balance sheet. Supplies Expense increases
overall expenses on the income statement, which reduces net income.

Transaction 14: The equipment purchased on January 5 depreciated $75 during the month of January.
Analysis:
• Equipment lost value in the amount of $75 during January. This depreciation will impact the Accumulated
Depreciation–Equipment account and the Depreciation Expense–Equipment account. While we are not
doing depreciation calculations here, you will come across more complex calculations in the future.
• Accumulated Depreciation–Equipment is a contra asset account (contrary to Equipment) and increases
(credit) for $75.
• Depreciation Expense–Equipment is an expense account that is increasing (debit) for $75.

Impact on the financial statements: Accumulated Depreciation–Equipment is a contra account to
Equipment. When calculating the book value of Equipment, Accumulated Depreciation–Equipment will be
deducted from the original cost of the equipment. Therefore, total assets will decrease by $75 on the balance
sheet. Depreciation Expense will increase overall expenses on the income statement, which reduces net
income.

230

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Transaction 15: Printing Plus performed $600 of services during January for the customer from the January 9
transaction.
Analysis:
• The customer from the January 9 transaction gave the company $4,000 in advanced payment for services.
By the end of January the company had earned $600 of the advanced payment. This means that the
company still has yet to provide $3,400 in services to that customer.
• Since some of the unearned revenue is now earned, Unearned Revenue would decrease. Unearned
Revenue is a liability account and decreases on the debit side.
• The company can now recognize the $600 as earned revenue. Service Revenue increases (credit) for $600.

Impact on the financial statements: Unearned revenue is a liability account and will decrease total liabilities
and equity by $600 on the balance sheet. Service Revenue will increase overall revenue on the income
statement, which increases net income.

Transaction 16: Reviewing the company bank statement, Printing Plus discovers $140 of interest earned
during the month of January that was previously uncollected and unrecorded.
Analysis:
• Interest is revenue for the company on money kept in a savings account at the bank. The company only
sees the bank statement at the end of the month and needs to record interest revenue that has not yet
been collected or recorded.
• Interest Revenue is a revenue account that increases (credit) for $140.
• Since Printing Plus has yet to collect this interest revenue, it is considered a receivable. Interest Receivable
increases (debit) for $140.

Impact on the financial statements: Interest Receivable is an asset account and will increase total assets by
$140 on the balance sheet. Interest Revenue will increase overall revenue on the income statement, which
increases net income.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Transaction 17: Employees earned $1,500 in salaries for the period of January 21–January 31 that had been
previously unpaid and unrecorded.
Analysis:
• Salaries have accumulated since January 21 and will not be paid in the current period. Since the salaries
expense occurred in January, the expense recognition principle requires recognition in January.
• Salaries Expense is an expense account that is increasing (debit) for $1,500.
• Since the company has not yet paid salaries for this time period, Printing Plus owes the employees this
money. This creates a liability for Printing Plus. Salaries Payable increases (credit) for $1,500.

Impact on the financial statements: Salaries Payable is a liability account and will increase total liabilities
and equity by $1,500 on the balance sheet. Salaries expense will increase overall expenses on the income
statement, which decreases net income.

We now explore how these adjusting entries impact the general ledger (T-accounts).

YOUR TURN
Deferrals versus Accruals
Label each of the following as a deferral or an accrual, and explain your answer.
1. The company recorded supplies usage for the month.
2. A customer paid in advance for services, and the company recorded revenue earned after providing
service to that customer.
3. The company recorded salaries that had been earned by employees but were previously unrecorded
and have not yet been paid.
Solution
1. The company is recording a deferred expense. The company was deferring the recognition of
supplies from supplies expense until it had used the supplies.

231

232

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

2. The company has deferred revenue. It deferred the recognition of the revenue until it was actually
earned. The customer already paid the cash and is currently on the balance sheet as a liability.
3. The company has an accrued expense. The company is bringing the salaries that have been
incurred, added up since the last paycheck, onto the books for the first time during the adjusting
entry. Cash will be given to the employees at a later time.

LINK TO LEARNING
Several internet sites can provide additional information for you on adjusting entries. One very good site
where you can find many tools to help you study this topic is Accounting Coach (https://openstax.org/l/
50AcctCoach) which provides a tool that is available to you free of charge. Visit the website and take a
quiz on accounting basics (https://openstax.org/l/50AcctQuiz) to test your knowledge.

Posting Adjusting Entries
Once you have journalized all of your adjusting entries, the next step is posting the entries to your ledger.
Posting adjusting entries is no different than posting the regular daily journal entries. T-accounts will be the
visual representation for the Printing Plus general ledger.
Transaction 13: On January 31, Printing Plus took an inventory of its supplies and discovered that $100 of
supplies had been used during the month.
Journal entry and T-accounts:

In the journal entry, Supplies Expense has a debit of $100. This is posted to the Supplies Expense T-account on
the debit side (left side). Supplies has a credit balance of $100. This is posted to the Supplies T-account on the
credit side (right side). You will notice there is already a debit balance in this account from the purchase of
supplies on January 30. The $100 is deducted from $500 to get a final debit balance of $400.
Transaction 14: The equipment purchased on January 5 depreciated $75 during the month of January.
Journal entry and T-accounts:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

233

In the journal entry, Depreciation Expense–Equipment has a debit of $75. This is posted to the Depreciation
Expense–Equipment T-account on the debit side (left side). Accumulated Depreciation–Equipment has a credit
balance of $75. This is posted to the Accumulated Depreciation–Equipment T-account on the credit side (right
side).
Transaction 15: Printing Plus performed $600 of services during January for the customer from the January 9
transaction.
Journal entry and T-accounts:

In the journal entry, Unearned Revenue has a debit of $600. This is posted to the Unearned Revenue T-account
on the debit side (left side). You will notice there is already a credit balance in this account from the January 9
customer payment. The $600 debit is subtracted from the $4,000 credit to get a final balance of $3,400 (credit).
Service Revenue has a credit balance of $600. This is posted to the Service Revenue T-account on the credit
side (right side). You will notice there is already a credit balance in this account from other revenue
transactions in January. The $600 is added to the previous $9,500 balance in the account to get a new final
credit balance of $10,100.
Transaction 16: Reviewing the company bank statement, Printing Plus discovers $140 of interest earned
during the month of January that was previously uncollected and unrecorded.
Journal entry and T-accounts:

234

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

In the journal entry, Interest Receivable has a debit of $140. This is posted to the Interest Receivable T-account
on the debit side (left side). Interest Revenue has a credit balance of $140. This is posted to the Interest
Revenue T-account on the credit side (right side).
Transaction 17: Employees earned $1,500 in salaries for the period of January 21–January 31 that had been
previously unpaid and unrecorded.
Journal entry and T-accounts:

In the journal entry, Salaries Expense has a debit of $1,500. This is posted to the Salaries Expense T-account on
the debit side (left side). You will notice there is already a debit balance in this account from the January 20
employee salary expense. The $1,500 debit is added to the $3,600 debit to get a final balance of $5,100 (debit).
Salaries Payable has a credit balance of $1,500. This is posted to the Salaries Payable T-account on the credit
side (right side).

T-accounts Summary
Once all adjusting journal entries have been posted to T-accounts, we can check to make sure the accounting
equation remains balanced. Following is a summary showing the T-accounts for Printing Plus including
adjusting entries.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Figure 4.5

235

Printing Plus summary of T-accounts with Adjusting Entries. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The sum on the assets side of the accounting equation equals $29,965, found by adding together the final
balances in each asset account (24,800 + 1,200 + 140 + 400 + 3,500 – 75). To find the total on the liabilities and
equity side of the equation, we need to find the difference between debits and credits. Credits on the liabilities
and equity side of the equation total $35,640 (500 + 1,500 + 3,400 + 20,000 + 10,100 + 140). Debits on the
liabilities and equity side of the equation total $5,675 (100 + 100 + 5,100 + 300 + 75). The difference between
$35,640 – $5,675 = $29,965. Thus, the equation remains balanced with $29,965 on the asset side and $29,965 on
the liabilities and equity side. Now that we have the T-account information, and have confirmed the accounting

236

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

equation remains balanced, we can create the adjusted trial balance in our sixth step in the accounting cycle.

LINK TO LEARNING
When posting any kind of journal entry to a general ledger, it is important to have an organized system
for recording to avoid any account discrepancies and misreporting. To do this, companies can streamline
their general ledger and remove any unnecessary processes or accounts. Check out this article
“Encourage General Ledger Efficiency” from the Journal of Accountancy (https://openstax.org/l/
50JrnAcctArticl) that discusses some strategies to improve general ledger efficiency.

4.4

Use the Ledger Balances to Prepare an Adjusted Trial Balance

Once all of the adjusting entries have been posted to the general ledger, we are ready to start working on
preparing the adjusted trial balance. Preparing an adjusted trial balance is the sixth step in the accounting
cycle. An adjusted trial balance is a list of all accounts in the general ledger, including adjusting entries,
which have nonzero balances. This trial balance is an important step in the accounting process because it
helps identify any computational errors throughout the first five steps in the cycle.
As with the unadjusted trial balance, transferring information from T-accounts to the adjusted trial balance
requires consideration of the final balance in each account. If the final balance in the ledger account (Taccount) is a debit balance, you will record the total in the left column of the trial balance. If the final balance in
the ledger account (T-account) is a credit balance, you will record the total in the right column.
Once all ledger accounts and their balances are recorded, the debit and credit columns on the adjusted trial
balance are totaled to see if the figures in each column match. The final total in the debit column must be the
same dollar amount that is determined in the final credit column.
Let’s now take a look at the adjusted T-accounts and adjusted trial balance for Printing Plus to see how the
information is transferred from these T-accounts to the adjusted trial balance. We only focus on those general
ledger accounts that had balance adjustments.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

237

For example, Interest Receivable is an adjusted account that has a final balance of $140 on the debit side. This
balance is transferred to the Interest Receivable account in the debit column on the adjusted trial balance.
Supplies ($400), Supplies Expense ($100), Salaries Expense ($5,100), and Depreciation Expense–Equipment
($75) also have debit final balances in their adjusted T-accounts, so this information will be transferred to the
debit column on the adjusted trial balance. Accumulated Depreciation–Equipment ($75), Salaries Payable
($1,500), Unearned Revenue ($3,400), Service Revenue ($10,100), and Interest Revenue ($140) all have credit
final balances in their T-accounts. These credit balances would transfer to the credit column on the adjusted
trial balance.
Once all balances are transferred to the adjusted trial balance, we sum each of the debit and credit columns.
The debit and credit columns both total $35,715, which means they are equal and in balance.

238

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

After the adjusted trial balance is complete, we next prepare the company’s financial statements.

THINK IT THROUGH
Cash or Accrual Basis Accounting?
You are a new accountant at a salon. The salon had previously used cash basis accounting to prepare its
financial records but now considers switching to an accrual basis method. You have been tasked with
determining if this transition is appropriate.
When you go through the records you notice that this transition will greatly impact how the salon reports
revenues and expenses. The salon will now report some revenues and expenses before it receives or
pays cash.
How will change positively impact its business reporting? How will it negatively impact its business
reporting? If you were the accountant, would you recommend the salon transition from cash basis to
accrual basis?

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Why Is the Adjusted Trial Balance So Important?
As you have learned, the adjusted trial balance is an important step in the accounting process. But
outside of the accounting department, why is the adjusted trial balance important to the rest of the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

239

organization? An employee or customer may not immediately see the impact of the adjusted trial
balance on his or her involvement with the company.
The adjusted trial balance is the key point to ensure all debits and credits are in the general ledger
accounts balance before information is transferred to financial statements. Financial statements drive
decision-making for a business. Budgeting for employee salaries, revenue expectations, sales prices,
expense reductions, and long-term growth strategies are all impacted by what is provided on the
financial statements.
So if the company skips over creating an adjusted trial balance to make sure all accounts are balanced or
adjusted, it runs the risk of creating incorrect financial statements and making important decisions based
on inaccurate financial information.

4.5

Prepare Financial Statements Using the Adjusted Trial Balance

Once you have prepared the adjusted trial balance, you are ready to prepare the financial statements.
Preparing financial statements is the seventh step in the accounting cycle. Remember that we have four
financial statements to prepare: an income statement, a statement of retained earnings, a balance sheet, and
the statement of cash flows. These financial statements were introduced in Introduction to Financial
Statements and Statement of Cash Flows dedicates in-depth discussion to that statement.
To prepare the financial statements, a company will look at the adjusted trial balance for account information.
From this information, the company will begin constructing each of the statements, beginning with the income
statement. Income statements will include all revenue and expense accounts. The statement of retained
earnings will include beginning retained earnings, any net income (loss) (found on the income statement), and
dividends. The balance sheet is going to include assets, contra assets, liabilities, and stockholder equity
accounts, including ending retained earnings and common stock.

240

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

YOUR TURN
Magnificent Adjusted Trial Balance

Go over the adjusted trial balance for Magnificent Landscaping Service. Identify which income statement
each account will go on: Balance Sheet, Statement of Retained Earnings, or Income Statement.
Solution
Balance Sheet: Cash, accounts receivable, office supplied, prepaid insurance, equipment, accumulated
depreciation (equipment), accounts payable, salaries payable, unearned lawn mowing revenue, and
common stock. Statement of Retained Earnings: Dividends. Income Statement: Lawn mowing revenue,
gas expense, advertising expense, depreciation expense (equipment), supplies expense, and salaries
expense.

Income Statement
An income statement shows the organization’s financial performance for a given period of time. When
preparing an income statement, revenues will always come before expenses in the presentation. For Printing
Plus, the following is its January 2019 Income Statement.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

241

Revenue and expense information is taken from the adjusted trial balance as follows:

Total revenues are $10,240, while total expenses are $5,575. Total expenses are subtracted from total revenues

242

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

to get a net income of $4,665. If total expenses were more than total revenues, Printing Plus would have a net
loss rather than a net income. This net income figure is used to prepare the statement of retained earnings.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
The Importance of Accurate Financial Statements
Financial statements give a glimpse into the operations of a company, and investors, lenders, owners,
and others rely on the accuracy of this information when making future investing, lending, and growth
decisions. When one of these statements is inaccurate, the financial implications are great.
For example, Celadon Group misreported revenues over the span of three years and elevated earnings
during those years. The total overreported income was approximately $200–$250 million. This gross
misreporting misled investors and led to the removal of Celadon Group from the New York Stock
Exchange. Not only did this negatively impact Celadon Group’s stock price and lead to criminal
investigations, but investors and lenders were left to wonder what might happen to their investment.
That is why it is so important to go through the detailed accounting process to reduce errors early on
and hopefully prevent misinformation from reaching financial statements. The business must have
strong internal controls and best practices to ensure the information is presented fairly.

[3]

Statement of Retained Earnings
The statement of retained earnings (which is often a component of the statement of stockholders’ equity)
shows how the equity (or value) of the organization has changed over a period of time. The statement of
retained earnings is prepared second to determine the ending retained earnings balance for the period. The
statement of retained earnings is prepared before the balance sheet because the ending retained earnings
amount is a required element of the balance sheet. The following is the Statement of Retained Earnings for
Printing Plus.

Net income information is taken from the income statement, and dividends information is taken from the
adjusted trial balance as follows.

3 James Jaillet. “Celadon under Criminal Investigation over Financial Statements.” Commercial Carrier Journal. July 25, 2018.
https://www.ccjdigital.com/200520-2/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

243

The statement of retained earnings always leads with beginning retained earnings. Beginning retained
earnings carry over from the previous period’s ending retained earnings balance. Since this is the first month
of business for Printing Plus, there is no beginning retained earnings balance. Notice the net income of $4,665
from the income statement is carried over to the statement of retained earnings. Dividends are taken away
from the sum of beginning retained earnings and net income to get the ending retained earnings balance of

244

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

$4,565 for January. This ending retained earnings balance is transferred to the balance sheet.

LINK TO LEARNING
Concepts Statements give the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) a guide to creating
accounting principles and consider the limitations of financial statement reporting. See the FASB’s
“Concepts Statements” page (https://openstax.org/l/50FASBConState) to learn more.

Balance Sheet
The balance sheet is the third statement prepared after the statement of retained earnings and lists what the
organization owns (assets), what it owes (liabilities), and what the shareholders control (equity) on a specific
date. Remember that the balance sheet represents the accounting equation, where assets equal liabilities plus
stockholders’ equity. The following is the Balance Sheet for Printing Plus.

Ending retained earnings information is taken from the statement of retained earnings, and asset, liability, and
common stock information is taken from the adjusted trial balance as follows.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

245

Looking at the asset section of the balance sheet, Accumulated Depreciation–Equipment is included as a
contra asset account to equipment. The accumulated depreciation ($75) is taken away from the original cost of
the equipment ($3,500) to show the book value of equipment ($3,425). The accounting equation is balanced, as
shown on the balance sheet, because total assets equal $29,965 as do the total liabilities and stockholders’
equity.
There is a worksheet approach a company may use to make sure end-of-period adjustments translate to the
correct financial statements.

IFRS CONNECTION
Financial Statements
Both US-based companies and those headquartered in other countries produce the same primary
financial statements—Income Statement, Balance Sheet, and Statement of Cash Flows. The presentation

246

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

of these three primary financial statements is largely similar with respect to what should be reported
under US GAAP and IFRS, but some interesting differences can arise, especially when presenting the
Balance Sheet.
While both US GAAP and IFRS require the same minimum elements that must be reported on the Income
Statement, such as revenues, expenses, taxes, and net income, to name a few, publicly traded companies
in the United States have further requirements placed by the SEC on the reporting of financial
statements. For example, IFRS-based financial statements are only required to report the current period
of information and the information for the prior period. US GAAP has no requirement for reporting prior
periods, but the SEC requires that companies present one prior period for the Balance Sheet and three
prior periods for the Income Statement. Under both IFRS and US GAAP, companies can report more than
the minimum requirements.
Presentation differences are most noticeable between the two forms of GAAP in the Balance Sheet.
Under US GAAP there is no specific requirement on how accounts should be presented. However, the SEC
requires that companies present their Balance Sheet information in liquidity order, which means current
assets listed first with cash being the first account presented, as it is a company’s most liquid account.
Liquidity refers to how easily an item can be converted to cash. IFRS requires that accounts be classified
into current and noncurrent categories for both assets and liabilities, but no specific presentation format
is required. Thus, for US companies, the first category always seen on a Balance Sheet is Current Assets,
and the first account balance reported is cash. This is not always the case under IFRS. While many
Balance Sheets of international companies will be presented in the same manner as those of a US
company, the lack of a required format means that a company can present noncurrent assets first,
followed by current assets. The accounts of a Balance Sheet using IFRS might appear as shown here.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

247

Review the annual report of Stora Enso (https://openstax.org/l/50StoraEnso2017) which is an
international company that utilizes the illustrated format in presenting its Balance Sheet, also called the
Statement of Financial Position. The Balance Sheet is found on page 31 of the report.
Some of the biggest differences that occur on financial statements prepared under US GAAP versus IFRS
relate primarily to measurement or timing issues: in other words, how a transaction is valued and when
it is recorded.

Ten-Column Worksheets
The 10-column worksheet is an all-in-one spreadsheet showing the transition of account information from
the trial balance through the financial statements. Accountants use the 10-column worksheet to help calculate
end-of-period adjustments. Using a 10-column worksheet is an optional step companies may use in their
accounting process.

248

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Here is a picture of a 10-column worksheet for Printing Plus.

There are five sets of columns, each set having a column for debit and credit, for a total of 10 columns. The five
column sets are the trial balance, adjustments, adjusted trial balance, income statement, and the balance
sheet. After a company posts its day-to-day journal entries, it can begin transferring that information to the
trial balance columns of the 10-column worksheet.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

The trial balance information for Printing Plus is shown previously. Notice that the debit and credit columns
both equal $34,000. If we go back and look at the trial balance for Printing Plus, we see that the trial balance
shows debits and credits equal to $34,000.

249

250

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Once the trial balance information is on the worksheet, the next step is to fill in the adjusting information from
the posted adjusted journal entries.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

The adjustments total of $2,415 balances in the debit and credit columns.
The next step is to record information in the adjusted trial balance columns.

251

252

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

To get the numbers in these columns, you take the number in the trial balance column and add or subtract
any number found in the adjustment column. For example, Cash shows an unadjusted balance of $24,800.
There is no adjustment in the adjustment columns, so the Cash balance from the unadjusted balance column
is transferred over to the adjusted trial balance columns at $24,800. Interest Receivable did not exist in the trial
balance information, so the balance in the adjustment column of $140 is transferred over to the adjusted trial
balance column.
Unearned revenue had a credit balance of $4,000 in the trial balance column, and a debit adjustment of $600 in
the adjustment column. Remember that adding debits and credits is like adding positive and negative
numbers. This means the $600 debit is subtracted from the $4,000 credit to get a credit balance of $3,400 that
is translated to the adjusted trial balance column.
Service Revenue had a $9,500 credit balance in the trial balance column, and a $600 credit balance in the
Adjustments column. To get the $10,100 credit balance in the adjusted trial balance column requires adding
together both credits in the trial balance and adjustment columns (9,500 + 600). You will do the same process
for all accounts. Once all accounts have balances in the adjusted trial balance columns, add the debits and

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

credits to make sure they are equal. In the case of Printing Plus, the balances equal $35,715. If you check the
adjusted trial balance for Printing Plus, you will see the same equal balance is present.

Next you will take all of the figures in the adjusted trial balance columns and carry them over to either the
income statement columns or the balance sheet columns.

253

254

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

YOUR TURN
Income Statement and Balance Sheet

Take a couple of minutes and fill in the income statement and balance sheet columns. Total them when
you are done. Do not panic when they do not balance. They will not balance at this time.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

255

Solution

Every other account title has been highlighted to help your eyes focus better while checking your work.

Looking at the income statement columns, we see that all revenue and expense accounts are listed in either
the debit or credit column. This is a reminder that the income statement itself does not organize information
into debits and credits, but we do use this presentation on a 10-column worksheet.

256

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

You will notice that when debit and credit income statement columns are totaled, the balances are not the
same. The debit balance equals $5,575, and the credit balance equals $10,240. Why do they not balance?
If the debit and credit columns equal each other, it means the expenses equal the revenues. This would
happen if a company broke even, meaning the company did not make or lose any money. If there is a
difference between the two numbers, that difference is the amount of net income, or net loss, the company
has earned.
In the Printing Plus case, the credit side is the higher figure at $10,240. The credit side represents revenues.
This means revenues exceed expenses, thus giving the company a net income. If the debit column were larger,
this would mean the expenses were larger than revenues, leading to a net loss. You want to calculate the net
income and enter it onto the worksheet. The $4,665 net income is found by taking the credit of $10,240 and
subtracting the debit of $5,575. When entering net income, it should be written in the column with the lower
total. In this instance, that would be the debit side. You then add together the $5,575 and $4,665 to get a total

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

257

of $10,240. This balances the two columns for the income statement. If you review the income statement, you
see that net income is in fact $4,665.

258

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

We now consider the last two columns for the balance sheet. In these columns we record all asset, liability, and
equity accounts.
When adding the total debits and credits, you notice they do not balance. The debit column equals $30,140,
and the credit column equals $25,475. How do we get the columns to balance?
Treat the income statement and balance sheet columns like a double-entry accounting system, where if you
have a debit on the income statement side, you must have a credit equaling the same amount on the credit
side. In this case we added a debit of $4,665 to the income statement column. This means we must add a
credit of $4,665 to the balance sheet column. Once we add the $4,665 to the credit side of the balance sheet
column, the two columns equal $30,140.
You may notice that dividends are included in our 10-column worksheet balance sheet columns even though
this account is not included on a balance sheet. So why is it included here? There is actually a very good reason

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

259

we put dividends in the balance sheet columns.
When you prepare a balance sheet, you must first have the most updated retained earnings balance. To get
that balance, you take the beginning retained earnings balance + net income – dividends. If you look at the
worksheet for Printing Plus, you will notice there is no retained earnings account. That is because they just
started business this month and have no beginning retained earnings balance.
If you look in the balance sheet columns, we do have the new, up-to-date retained earnings, but it is spread
out through two numbers. You have the dividends balance of $100 and net income of $4,665. If you combine
these two individual numbers ($4,665 – $100), you will have your updated retained earnings balance of $4,565,
as seen on the statement of retained earnings.

You will not see a similarity between the 10-column worksheet and the balance sheet, because the 10-column
worksheet is categorizing all accounts by the type of balance they have, debit or credit. This leads to a final
balance of $30,140.
The balance sheet is classifying the accounts by type of accounts, assets and contra assets, liabilities, and
equity. This leads to a final balance of $29,965. Even though they are the same numbers in the accounts, the
totals on the worksheet and the totals on the balance sheet will be different because of the different
presentation methods.

LINK TO LEARNING
Publicly traded companies release their financial statements quarterly for open viewing by the general
public, which can usually be viewed on their websites. One such company is Alphabet, Inc. (trade name
Google). Take a look at Alphabet’s quarter ended March 31, 2018, financial statements
(https://openstax.org/l/50AlphaMar2018) from the SEC Form 10-Q.

YOUR TURN
Frank’s Net Income and Loss
What amount of net income/loss does Frank have?

260

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Solution

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

In Completing the Accounting Cycle, we continue our discussion of the accounting cycle, completing the last
steps of journalizing and posting closing entries and preparing a post-closing trial balance.

261

262

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Key Terms
10-column worksheet all-in-one spreadsheet showing the transition of account information from the trial
balance through the financial statements
accounting period breaks down company financial information into specific time spans and can cover a
month, quarter, half-year, or full year
accrual type of adjusting entry that accumulates during a period, where an amount was previously
unrecorded
accrued expense expense incurred in a period but not yet recorded, and no money has been paid
accrued revenue revenue earned in a period but not yet recorded, and no money has been collected
adjusted trial balance list of all accounts in the general ledger, including adjusting entries, which have
nonzero balances
adjusting entries update accounting records at the end of a period for any transactions that have not yet
been recorded
book value difference between the asset’s value (cost) and accumulated depreciation; also, value at which
assets or liabilities are recorded in a company’s financial statements
calendar year reports financial data from January 1 to December 31 of a specific year
contra account account paired with another account type that has an opposite normal balance to the paired
account; reduces or increases the balance in the paired account at the end of a period
deferral prepaid expense and revenue accounts that have delayed recognition until they have been used or
earned
fiscal year twelve-month reporting cycle that can begin in any month, and records financial data for that
twelve-month consecutive period
interim period any reporting period shorter than a full year (fiscal or calendar)
modified accrual accounting commonly used in governmental accounting and combines accrual basis and
cash basis accounting
tax basis accounting establishes the tax effects of transactions in determining the tax liability of an
organization
useful life time period over which an asset cost is allocated

Summary
4.1 Explain the Concepts and Guidelines Affecting Adjusting Entries
• The next three steps in the accounting cycle are adjusting entries (journalizing and posting), preparing an
adjusted trial balance, and preparing the financial statements. These steps consider end-of-period
transactions and their impact on financial statements.
• Accrual basis accounting is used by US GAAP or IFRS-governed companies, and it requires revenues and
expenses to be recorded in the accounting period in which they occur, not necessarily where an
associated cash event happened. This is unlike cash basis accounting that will delay reporting revenues
and expenses until a cash event occurs.
• Companies need timely and consistent financial information presented for users to consider in their
decision-making. Accounting periods help companies do this by breaking down information into months,
quarters, half-years, and full years.
• A calendar year considers financial information for a company for the time period of January 1 to
December 31 on a specific year. A fiscal year is any twelve-month reporting cycle not beginning on

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

263

January 1 and ending on December 31.
• An interim period is any reporting period that does not cover a full year. This can be useful when needing
timely information for users making financial decisions.
4.2 Discuss the Adjustment Process and Illustrate Common Types of Adjusting Entries
• Incorrect balances: Incorrect balances on the unadjusted trial balance occur because not every
transaction produces an original source document that will alert the bookkeeper it is time to make an
entry. It is not that the accountant made an error, it means an adjustment is required to correct the
balance.
• Need for adjustments: Some account adjustments are needed to update records that may not have
original source documents or those that do not reflect change on a daily basis. The revenue recognition
principle, expense recognition principle, and time period assumption all further the need for adjusting
entries because they require revenue and expense reporting occur when earned and incurred in a current
period.
• Prepaid expenses: Prepaid expenses are assets paid for before their use. When they are used, this asset’s
value is reduced and an expense is recognized. Some examples include supplies, insurance, and
depreciation.
• Unearned revenues: These are customer advanced payments for product or services yet to be provided.
When the company provides the product or service, revenue is then recognized.
• Accrued revenues: Accrued revenues are revenues earned in a period but have yet to be recorded and no
money has been collected. Accrued revenues are updated at the end of the period to recognize revenue
and money owed to the company.
• Accrued expenses: Accrued expenses are incurred in a period but have yet to be recorded and no money
has been paid. Accrued expenses are updated to reflect the expense and the company’s liability.
4.3 Record and Post the Common Types of Adjusting Entries
• Rules for adjusting entries: The rules for recording adjusting entries are as follows: every adjusting entry
will have one income statement account and one balance sheet account, cash will never be in an adjusting
entry, and the adjusting entry records the change in amount that occurred during the period.
• Posting adjusting entries: Posting adjusting entries is the same process as posting general journal entries.
The additional adjustments may add accounts to the end of the period or may change account balances
from the earlier journal entry step in the accounting cycle.
4.4 Use the Ledger Balances to Prepare an Adjusted Trial Balance
• Adjusted trial balance: The adjusted trial balance lists all accounts in the general ledger, including
adjusting entries, which have nonzero balances. This trial balance is an important step in the accounting
process because it helps identify any computational errors throughout the first five steps in the cycle.
4.5 Prepare Financial Statements Using the Adjusted Trial Balance
• Income Statement: The income statement shows the net income or loss as a result of revenue and
expense activities occurring in a period.
• Statement of Retained Earnings: The statement of retained earnings shows the effects of net income
(loss) and dividends on the earnings the company maintains.
• Balance Sheet: The balance sheet visually represents the accounting equation, showing that assets
balance with liabilities and equity.
• 10-column worksheet: The 10-column worksheet organizes data from the trial balance all the way through
the financial statements.

264

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Multiple Choice
1.

4.1 Which of the following is any reporting period shorter than a full year (fiscal or calendar) and can

encompass monthly, quarterly, or half-year statements?
A.

fiscal year

B.

interim period

C.

calendar year

D.

fixed year

2.

4.1 Which of the following is the federal, independent agency that provides oversight of public

companies to maintain fair representation of company financial activities for investors to make informed
decisions?
A.

IRS (Internal Revenue Service)

B.

SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission)

C.

FASB (Financial Accounting Standards Board)

D.

FDIC (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation)

3.

4.1 Revenues and expenses must be recorded in the accounting period in which they were earned or

incurred, no matter when cash receipts or outlays occur under which of the following accounting methods?
A.

accrual basis accounting

B.

cash basis accounting

C.

tax basis accounting

D.

revenue basis accounting

4.

4.1 Which of the following breaks down company financial information into specific time spans, and can

cover a month, quarter, half-year, or full year?
A.

accounting period

B.

yearly period

C.

monthly period

D.

fiscal period

5.

4.1 Which of the following is a twelve-month reporting cycle that can begin in any month, except January

1, and records financial data for that twelve-month consecutive period?
A.

fixed year

B.

interim period

C.

calendar year

D.

fiscal year

6.

4.2 Which type of adjustment occurs when cash is either collected or paid, but the related income or

expense is not reportable in the current period?
A.

accrual

B.

deferral

C.

estimate

D.

cull

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

7.

265

4.2 Which type of adjustment occurs when cash is not collected or paid, but the related income or

expense is reportable in the current period?
A.

accrual

B.

deferral

C.

estimate

D.

cull

8.

4.2 If an adjustment includes an entry to a payable or receivable account, which type of adjustment is it?
A.

accrual

B.

deferral

C.

estimate

D.

cull

9.

4.2 If an adjustment includes an entry to Accumulated Depreciation, which type of adjustment is it?
A.

accrual

B.

deferral

C.

estimate

D.

cull

10.

4.2 Rent collected in advance is an example of which of the following?
A.

accrued expense

B.

accrued revenue

C.

deferred expense (prepaid expense)

D.

deferred revenue (unearned revenue)

11.

4.2 Rent paid in advance is an example of which of the following?
A.

accrued expense

B.

accrued revenue

C.

deferred expense (prepaid expense)

D.

deferred revenue (unearned revenue)

12.

4.2 Salaries owed but not yet paid is an example of which of the following?
A.

accrued expense

B.

accrued revenue

C.

deferred expense (prepaid expense)

D.

deferred revenue (unearned revenue)

13.

4.2 Revenue earned but not yet collected is an example of which of the following?
A.

accrued expense

B.

accrued revenue

C.

deferred expense (prepaid expense)

D.

deferred revenue (unearned revenue)

14.

4.3 What adjusting journal entry is needed to record depreciation expense for the period?
A.

a debit to Depreciation Expense; a credit to Cash

B.

a debit to Accumulated Depreciation; a credit to Depreciation Expense

C.

a debit to Depreciation Expense; a credit to Accumulated Depreciation

D.

a debit to Accumulated Depreciation; a credit to Cash

266

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

15.

4.3 Which of these transactions requires an adjusting entry (debit) to Unearned Revenue?
A.

revenue earned but not yet collected

B.

revenue collected but not yet earned

C.

revenue earned before being collected, when it is later collected

D.

revenue collected before being earned, when it is later earned

16.

4.4 What critical purpose does the adjusted trial balance serve?
A.

It proves that transactions have been posted correctly

B.

It is the source document from which to prepare the financial statements

C.

It shows the beginning balances of every account, to be used to start the new year’s records

D.

It proves that all journal entries have been made correctly.

17.

4.4 Which of the following accounts’ balance would be a different number on the Balance Sheet than it

is on the adjusted trial balance?
A.

accumulated depreciation

B.

unearned service revenue

C.

retained earnings

D.

dividends

18.

4.5 On which financial statement would the Supplies account appear?
A.

Balance Sheet

B.

Income Statement

C.

Retained Earnings Statement

D.

Statement of Cash Flows

19.

4.5 On which financial statement would the Dividends account appear?
A.

Balance Sheet

B.

Income Statement

C.

Retained Earnings Statement

D.

Statement of Cash Flows

20.

4.5 On which financial statement would the Accumulated Depreciation account appear?
A.

Balance Sheet

B.

Income Statement

C.

Retained Earnings Statement

D.

Statement of Cash Flows

21.

4.5 On which two financial statements would the Retained Earnings account appear?
A.

Balance Sheet

B.

Income Statement

C.

Retained Earnings Statement

D.

Statement of Cash Flows

Questions
1.

4.1 Describe the revenue recognition principle. Give specifics.

2.

4.1 Describe the expense recognition principle (matching principle). Give specifics.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

3.

267

4.2 What parts of the accounting cycle require analytical processes, rather than methodical processes?

Explain.
4.

4.2 Why is the adjusting process needed?

5.

4.2 Name two types of adjusting journal entries that are commonly made before preparing financial

statements? Explain, with examples.
6.

4.2 Are there any accounts that would never have an adjusting entry? Explain.

7.

4.2 Why do adjusting entries always include both balance sheet and income statement accounts?

8.

4.2 Why are adjusting journal entries needed?

9.

4.3 If the Supplies account had an ending balance of $1,200 and the actual count for the remaining

supplies was $400 at the end of the period, what adjustment would be needed?
10.

4.3 When a company collects cash from customers before performing the contracted service, what is

the impact, and how should it be recorded?
11.

4.3 If the Prepaid Insurance account had a balance of $12,000, representing one year’s policy premium,

which was paid on July 1, what entry would be needed to adjust the Prepaid Insurance account at the end of
December, before preparing the financial statements?
12.

4.3 If adjusting entries include these listed accounts, what other account must be in that entry as well?

(A) Depreciation expense; (B) Unearned Service Revenue; (C) Prepaid Insurance; (D) Interest Payable.
13.

4.4 What is the difference between the trial balance and the adjusted trial balance?

14.

4.4 Why is the adjusted trial balance trusted as a reliable source for building the financial statements?

15.

4.5 Indicate on which financial statement the following accounts (from the adjusted trial balance) would

appear: (A) Sales Revenue; (B) Unearned Rent Revenue; (C) Prepaid Advertising; (D) Advertising Expense; (E)
Dividends; (F) Cash.

Exercise Set A
EA1.

4.2 Identify whether each of the following transactions, which are related to revenue recognition, are

accrual, deferral, or neither.
A.

sold goods to customers on credit

B.

collected cash from customer accounts

C.

sold goods to customers for cash

D.

collected cash in advance for goods to be delivered later

EA2.

4.2 Identify whether each of the following transactions, which are related to expense recognition, are

accrual, deferral, or neither.
A.

paid an expense for the current month

B.

prepaid an expense for future months

C.

made a payment to reduce accounts payable

D.

incurred a current-month expense, to be paid next month

268

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

EA3.

4.2 Identify which type of adjustment is indicated by these transactions. Choose accrued revenue,

accrued expense, deferred revenue, or deferred expense.
A.

rent paid in advance for use of property

B.

cash received in advance for future services

C.

supplies inventory purchased

D.

fees earned but not yet collected

EA4.

4.2 The following accounts were used to make year-end adjustments. Identify the related account that

is associated with this account (the other account in the adjusting entry).
A.

Salaries Payable

B.

Depreciation Expense

C.

Supplies

D.

Unearned Rent

EA5.

4.2 Reviewing insurance policies revealed that a single policy was purchased on August 1, for one

year’s coverage, in the amount of $6,000. There was no previous balance in the Prepaid Insurance account at
that time. Based on the information provided:
A.

Make the December 31 adjusting journal entry to bring the balances to correct.

B.

Show the impact that these transactions had.

EA6.

4.3 On July 1, a client paid an advance payment (retainer) of $5,000 to cover future legal services.

During the period, the company completed $3,500 of the agreed-on services for the client. There was no
beginning balance in the Unearned Revenue account for the period. Based on the information provided,
A.

Make the December 31 adjusting journal entry to bring the balances to correct.

B.

Show the impact that these transactions had.

EA7.

4.3 Reviewing payroll records indicates that employee salaries that are due to be paid on January 3

include $3,575 in wages for the last week of December. There was no previous balance in the Salaries Payable
account at that time. Based on the information provided, make the December 31 adjusting journal entry to
bring the balances to correct.
EA8.

4.3 Supplies were purchased on January 1, to be used throughout the year, in the amount of $8,500.

On December 31, a physical count revealed that the remaining supplies totaled $1,200. There was no
beginning of the year balance in the Supplies account. Based on the information provided:
A.

Create journal entries for the original transaction

B.

Create journal entries for the December 31 adjustment needed to bring the balances to correct

C.

Show the activity, with ending balance

EA9.

4.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following business transaction and related adjusting entry.

A.

January 12, purchased supplies for cash, to be used all year, $3,850

B.

December 31, physical count of remaining supplies, $800

EA10.

4.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following adjustments.

A.

Insurance that expired this period, $18,000

B.

Depreciation on assets, $4,800

C.

Salaries earned by employees but unpaid, $1,200

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

EA11.

4.3 Prepare adjusting journal entries, as needed, considering the account balances excerpted from

the unadjusted trial balance and the adjustment data.

A.

depreciation on fixed assets, $ 8,500

B.

unexpired prepaid rent, $12,500

C.

remaining balance of unearned revenue, $555

EA12.

4.4 Prepare an adjusted trial balance from the following adjusted account balances (assume

accounts have normal balances).

EA13.

4.4 Prepare an adjusted trial balance from the following account information, considering the

adjustment data provided (assume accounts have normal balances).

Adjustments needed:
Salaries due to administrative employees, but unpaid at period end, $2,000
Insurance still unexpired at end of the period, $12,000

269

270

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

EA14.

4.5 From the following Company A adjusted trial balance, prepare simple financial statements, as

follows:
A.

Income Statement

B.

Retained Earnings Statement

C.

Balance Sheet

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

4.1 Identify whether each of the following transactions, which are related to revenue recognition, are

accrual, deferral, or neither.
A.

provided legal services to client, who paid at the time of service

B.

received cash for legal services performed last month

C.

received cash from clients for future services to be provided

D.

provided legal services to client, to be collected next month

EB2.

4.1 Identify whether each of the following transactions, which are related to expense recognition, are

accrual, deferral, or neither.
A.

recorded employee salaries earned, to be paid in future month

B.

paid employees for current month salaries

C.

paid employee salaries for work performed in a prior month

D.

gave an employee an advance on future wages

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

EB3.

271

4.2 Indicate what impact the following adjustments have on the accounting equation, Assets =

Liabilities + Equity (assume normal balances).

Impact 1
A.

Prepaid Insurance adjusted from $5,000 to $3,600

B.

Interest Payable adjusted from $5,300 to $6,800

C.

Prepaid Insurance adjusted from $18,500 to $6,300

D.

Supplies account balance $500, actual count $220

Impact 2

Table 4.5
EB4.

4.2 What two accounts are affected by the needed adjusting entries?

A.

supplies actual counts are lower than account balance

B.

employee salaries are due but not paid at year end

C.

insurance premiums that were paid in advance have expired

EB5.

4.3 Reviewing insurance policies revealed that a single policy was purchased on March 1, for one

year's coverage, in the amount of $9,000. There was no previous balance in the Prepaid Insurance account at
that time. Based on the information provided,
A.

Make the December 31 adjusting journal entry to bring the balances to correct.

B.

Show the impact that these transactions had.

EB6.

4.3 On September 1, a company received an advance rental payment of $12,000, to cover six months’

rent on an office building. There was no beginning balance in the Unearned Rent account for the period.
Based on the information provided,
A.

Make the December 31 adjusting journal entry to bring the balances to correct.

B.

Show the impact that these transactions had.

EB7.

4.3 Reviewing payroll records indicates that one-fifth of employee salaries that are due to be paid on

the first payday in January, totaling $15,000, are actually for hours worked in December. There was no previous
balance in the Salaries Payable account at that time. Based on the information provided, make the December
31 adjusting journal entry to bring the balances to correct.
EB8.

4.3 On July 1, a client paid an advance payment (retainer) of $10,000, to cover future legal services.

During the period, the company completed $6,200 of the agreed-on services for the client. There was no
beginning balance in the Unearned Revenue account for the period. Based on the information provided, make
the journal entries needed to bring the balances to correct for:
A.

original transaction

B.

December 31 adjustment

EB9.

4.3 Prepare journal entries to record the business transaction and related adjusting entry for the

following:
A.

March 1, paid cash for one year premium on insurance contract, $18,000

B.

December 31, remaining unexpired balance of insurance, $3,000

272

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

EB10.

4.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following adjustments:

A.

revenue earned but not collected, nor recorded, $14,000

B.

revenue earned that had originally been collected in advance, $8,500

C.

taxes due but not yet paid, $ 2,750

EB11.

4.3 Prepare adjusting journal entries, as needed, considering the account balances excerpted from

the unadjusted trial balance and the adjustment data.

A.

amount due for employee salaries, $4,800

B.

actual count of supplies inventory, $ 2,300

C.

depreciation on equipment, $3,000

EB12.

4.4 Prepare an adjusted trial balance from the following adjusted account balances (assume accounts

have normal balances).

EB13.

4.4 Prepare an adjusted trial balance from the following account information, considering the

adjustment data provided (assume accounts have normal balances).

Adjustments needed:
• Physical count of supplies inventory remaining at end of period, $2,150
• Taxes payable at end of period, $3,850

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

EB14.

273

4.5 From the following Company B adjusted trial balance, prepare simple financial statements, as

follows:
A.

Income Statement

B.

Retained Earnings Statement

C.

Balance Sheet

Problem Set A
PA1.

4.1 Identify whether each of the following transactions, which are related to revenue recognition, are

accrual, deferral, or neither.
A.

earn now, collect now

B.

earn now, collect later

C.

earn later, collect now

PA2.

4.1 To demonstrate the difference between cash account activity and accrual basis profits (net

income), note the amount each transaction affects cash and the amount each transaction affects net income.
A.

paid balance due for accounts payable $6,900

B.

charged clients for legal services provided $5,200

C.

purchased supplies on account $1,750

D.

collected legal service fees from clients for current month $3,700

E.

issued stock in exchange for a note payable $10,000

PA3.

4.2 Identify which type of adjustment is indicated by these transactions. Choose accrued revenue,

accrued expense, deferred revenue, deferred expense, or estimate.
A.

utilities owed but not paid

B.

cash received in advance for future services

C.

supplies inventory purchased

D.

fees earned but not yet collected

E.

depreciation expense recorded

F.

insurance paid for future periods

274

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

PA4.

4.2 Identify which type of adjustment is associated with this account, and what is the other account in

the adjustment? Choose accrued revenue, accrued expense, deferred revenue, or deferred expense.
A.

accounts receivable

B.

interest payable

C.

prepaid insurance

D.

unearned rent

PA5.

4.2 Indicate what impact the following adjustments have on the accounting equation, Assets =

Liabilities + Equity (assume normal balances).

Impact 1
A.

Unearned Fees adjusted from $7,000 to $5,000

B.

Recorded depreciation expense of $12,000

C.

Prepaid Insurance adjusted from $18,500 to $6,300

D.

Supplies account balance $500, actual count $220

Impact 2

Table 4.6
PA6.

4.2 What two accounts are affected by each of these adjustments?

A.

billed customers for services provided

B.

adjusted prepaid insurance to correct

C.

recorded depreciation expense

D.

recorded unpaid utility bill

E.

adjusted supplies inventory to correct

PA7.

4.3 Using the following information:

A.

make the December 31 adjusting journal entry for depreciation

B.

determine the net book value (NBV) of the asset on December 31

• Cost of asset, $250,000
• Accumulated depreciation, beginning of year, $80,000
• Current year depreciation, $25,000
PA8.

4.3 Use the following account T-balances (assume normal balances) and correct balance information

to make the December 31 adjusting journal entries.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

PA9.

275

4.3 Use the following account T-balances (assume normal balances) and correct balance information

to make the December 31 adjusting journal entries.

PA10.

4.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions. Create a T-account for Interest

Payable, post any entries that affect the account, and tally the ending balance for the account (assume Interest
Payable beginning balance of $2,500).
A.

March 1, paid interest due on note, $2,500

B.

December 31, interest accrued on note payable, $4,250

PA11.

4.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions. Create a T-account for Prepaid

Insurance, post any entries that affect the account, and tally the ending balance for the account (assume
Prepaid Insurance beginning balance of $9,000).
A.

April 1, paid cash for one-year policy, $18,000

B.

December 31, unexpired premiums, $4,500

PA12.

4.3 Determine the amount of cash expended for Salaries during the month, based on the entries in

the following accounts (assume 0 beginning balances).

PA13.

4.3 Prepare adjusting journal entries, as needed, considering the account balances excerpted from

the unadjusted trial balance and the adjustment data.

A.

supplies actual count at year end, $6,500

B.

remaining unexpired insurance, $6,000

C.

remaining unearned service revenue, $1,200

D.

salaries owed to employees, $2,400

E.

depreciation on property plant and equipment, $18,000

276

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

PA14.

4.4 Prepare an adjusted trial balance from the adjusted account balances; solve for the one missing

account balance: Cash (assume accounts have normal balances).

PA15.

4.4 Prepare an adjusted trial balance from the following account information, considering the

adjustment data provided (assume accounts have normal balances). Equipment was recently purchased, so
there is neither depreciation expense nor accumulated depreciation.

Adjustments needed:
• Salaries due to employees, but unpaid at the end of the period, $2,000
• Insurance still unexpired at end of the period, $12,000

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

PA16.

277

4.4 Prepare an adjusted trial balance from the following account information, and also considering

the adjustment data provided (assume accounts have normal balances). Equipment was recently purchased,
so there is neither depreciation expense nor accumulated depreciation.

Adjustments needed:
• Remaining unpaid Salaries due to employees at the end of the period, $0
• Accrued Interest Payable at the end of the period, $7,700
PA17.

4.5 Using the following Company W information, prepare a Retained Earnings Statement.

• Retained earnings balance January 1, 2019, $43,500
• Net income for year 2019, $55,289
• Dividends declared and paid for year 2019, $18,000
PA18.

4.5 From the following Company Y adjusted trial balance, prepare simple financial statements, as

follows:
A.

Income Statement

B.

Retained Earnings Statement

C.

Balance Sheet

278

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

Problem Set B

B

PB1.

4.1 Identify whether each of the following transactions, which are related to revenue recognition, are

accrual, deferral, or neither.
A.

expense now, pay now

B.

expense later, pay now

C.

expense now, pay later

PB2.

4.1 To demonstrate the difference between cash account activity and accrual basis profits (net

income), note the amount each transaction affects cash and the amount each transaction affects net income.
A.

issued stock for cash $20,000

B.

purchased supplies inventory on account $1,800

C.

paid employee salaries; assume it was current day’s expenses $950

D.

paid note payment to bank (principal only) $1,200

E.

collected balance on accounts receivable $4,750

PB3.

4.2 Identify which type of adjustment is indicated by these transactions. Choose accrued revenue,

accrued expense, deferred revenue, or deferred expense.
A.

fees earned and billed, but not collected

B.

recorded depreciation expense

C.

fees collected in advance of services

D.

salaries owed but not yet paid

E.

property rentals costs, prepaid for future months

F.

inventory purchased for cash

PB4.

4.2 Identify which type of adjustment is associated with this account, and what the other account is in

the adjustment. Choose accrued revenue, accrued expense, deferred revenue, or deferred expense.
A.

Salaries Payable

B.

Interest Receivable

C.

Unearned Fee Revenue

D.

Prepaid Rent

PB5.

4.2 Indicate what impact the following adjustments have on the accounting equation: Assets =

Liabilities + Equity (assume normal balances).

Impact 1
A.

Unearned Rent adjusted from $15,000 to $9,500

B.

Recorded salaries payable of $3,750

C.

Prepaid Rent adjusted from $6,000 to $4,000

D.

Recorded depreciation expense of $5,500

Table 4.7

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Impact 2

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

PB6.

279

4.2 What two accounts are affected by each of these adjustments?

A.

recorded accrued interest on note payable

B.

adjusted unearned rent to correct

C.

recorded depreciation for the year

D.

adjusted salaries payable to correct

E.

sold merchandise to customers on account

PB7.

4.3 Using the following information,

A.

Make the December 31 adjusting journal entry for depreciation.

B.

Determine the net book value (NBV) of the asset on December 31.

• Cost of asset, $195,000
• Accumulated depreciation, beginning of year, $26,000
• Current year depreciation, $13,000
PB8.

4.3 Use the following account T-balances (assume normal balances) and correct balance information

to make the December 31 adjusting journal entries.

PB9.

4.3 Use the following account T-balances (assume normal balances) and correct balance information

to make the December 31 adjusting journal entries.

PB10.

4.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions. Create a T-account for Supplies, post

any entries that affect the account, and tally ending balance for the account (assume Supplies beginning
balance of $6,550).
A.

January 26, purchased additional supplies for cash, $9,500

B.

December 31, actual count of supplies, $8,500

PB11.

4.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions. Create a T-account for Unearned

Revenue, post any entries that affect the account, tally ending balance for the account (assume Unearned
Revenue beginning balance of $12,500).
A.

May 1, collected an advance payment from client, $15,000

B.

December 31, remaining unearned advances, $7,500

280

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

PB12.

4.3 Determine the amount of cash expended for Insurance Premiums during the month, based on

the entries in the following accounts (assume 0 beginning balances).

PB13.

4.3 Prepare adjusting journal entries, as needed, considering the account balances excerpted from

the unadjusted trial balance and the adjustment data.

A.

depreciation on buildings and equipment, $17,500

B.

advertising still prepaid at year end, $2,200

C.

interest due on notes payable, $4,300

D.

unearned rental revenue, $6,900

E.

interest receivable on notes receivable, $1,200

PB14.

4.4 Prepare an adjusted trial balance from the adjusted account balances; solve for the one missing

account balance: Dividends (assume accounts have normal balances). Equipment was recently purchased, so
there is neither depreciation expense nor accumulated depreciation.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

PB15.

4.4 Prepare an adjusted trial balance from the following account information, considering the

adjustment data provided (assume accounts have normal balances). Building and Equipment were recently
purchased, so there is neither depreciation expense nor accumulated depreciation.

Adjustments needed:
• Physical count of supplies inventory remaining at end of period, $3,300
• Customer fees collected in advance (payments were recorded as Fees Earned), $18,500
PB16.

4.4 Prepare an adjusted trial balance from the following account information, and also considering

the adjustment data provided (assume accounts have normal balances).

Adjustments needed:
• Accrued interest revenue on investments at period end, $2,200
• Insurance still unexpired at end of the period, $12,000
PB17.

4.5 Using the following Company X information, prepare a Retained Earnings Statement:

• Retained earnings balance January 1, 2019, $121,500
• Net income for year 2019, $145,800
• Dividends declared and paid for year 2019, $53,000

281

282

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

PB18.

4.5 From the following Company Z adjusted trial balance, prepare simple financial statements, as

follows:
A.

Income Statement

B.

Retained Earnings Statement

C.

Balance Sheet

Thought Provokers
TP1.

4.1 Assume you are the controller of a large corporation, and the chief executive officer (CEO) has

requested that you explain to them why the net income that you are reporting for the year is so low, when the
CEO knows for a fact that the cash accounts are much higher at the end of the year than they were at the
beginning of the year. Write a memo to the CEO to offer some possible explanations for the disparity between
financial statement net income and the change in cash during the year.
TP2.

4.2 Search the US Securities and Exchange Commission website (https://www.sec.gov/edgar/

searchedgar/companysearch.html), and locate the latest Form 10-K for a company you would like to analyze.
Submit a short memo:
• State the name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen.
• Review the company’s end-of-period Balance Sheet for the most recent annual report, in search of
accruals and deferrals.
• List the name and account balance of at least four accounts that represent accruals or deferrals—these
could be accrued revenues, accrued expenses, deferred (unearned) revenues, or deferred (prepaid)
expenses.
• Provide the web link to the company’s Form 10-K, to allow accurate verification of your answers.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

TP3.

283

4.3 Search the web for instances of possible impropriety relating to earnings management. This could

be news reports, Securities and Exchange Commission violation reports, fraud charges, or any other source of
alleged financial statement judgement lapse.
• Write down the name and industry type of the company you are discussing.
• Describe the purported indiscretion, and how it relates to mis-reporting earnings or shady accounting.
• Estimate the impact of the potential misrepresented amount.
• Note: You do not have to have proof that a compromise occurred, but you do need to have a source of
your reporting of the potential trouble.
• Provide the web link to the information you found, to allow accurate verification of your answers.
TP4.

4.4 Assume you are employed as the chief financial officer of a corporation and are responsible for

preparation of the financial statements, including the adjusting process and preparation of the adjusted trial
balance. The company is facing a slow year, and after your adjusting entries, the financial statements are
accurately reflecting that fact. However, as you are discussing the matter with your boss, the chief executive
officer (CEO), he suggests that you have the power to make further adjustments to the statements, and that
you should use that power to “adjust” the profits and equity into a stronger position, so that investor
confidence in the company’s prospects will be restored.
Write a short memo to the CEO, stating your intentions about what you can and/or will do to make the
financial statements more appealing. Be specific about any planned adjustments that could be made,
assuming that normal period-end adjustments have already been reflected accurately in the financial
statements that you prepared.
TP5.

4.5 Search the SEC website (https://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html) and

locate the latest Form 10-K for a company you would like to analyze. Submit a short memo:
• State the name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen.
• Review the company’s end-of-period Balance Sheet, Income Statement, and Statement of Retained
Earnings.
• Reconstruct an adjusted trial balance for the company, from the information presented in the three
specified financial statements.
• Provide the web link to the company’s Form 10-K, to allow accurate verification of your answers.

284

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 4 The Adjustment Process

5

Completing the Accounting Cycle
Figure 5.1 Mark reviews the financial data from Supreme Cleaners. (credit left: modification of “Numbers and
Finance” by “reynermedia”/Flickr, CC BY 2.0; credit right: modification of “Dry cleaned clothes (Unsplash)” by
“m0851”/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

Chapter Outline
5.1 Describe and Prepare Closing Entries for a Business
5.2 Prepare a Post-Closing Trial Balance
5.3 Apply the Results from the Adjusted Trial Balance to Compute Current Ratio and Working Capital
Balance, and Explain How These Measures Represent Liquidity
5.4 Appendix: Complete a Comprehensive Accounting Cycle for a Business

Why It Matters
As we learned in Analyzing and Recording Transactions and The Adjustment Process, Mark Summers has
started his own dry-cleaning business called Supreme Cleaners. Mark had a busy first month of operations,
including purchasing equipment and supplies, paying his employees, and providing dry-cleaning services to
customers. Because Mark had established a sound accounting system to keep track of his daily transactions,
he was able to prepare complete and accurate financial statements showing his company’s progress and
financial position.
In order to move forward, Mark needs to review how financial data from his first month of operations
transitions into his second month of operations. It is important for Mark to make a smooth transition so he
can compare the financials from month to month, and continue on the right path toward growth. It will also
assure his investors and lenders that the company is operating as expected. So what does he need to do to
prepare for next month?

286

5.1

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Describe and Prepare Closing Entries for a Business

In this chapter, we complete the final steps (steps 8 and 9) of the accounting cycle, the closing process. You will
notice that we do not cover step 10, reversing entries. This is an optional step in the accounting cycle that you
will learn about in future courses. Steps 1 through 4 were covered in Analyzing and Recording Transactions
and Steps 5 through 7 were covered in The Adjustment Process.

Our discussion here begins with journalizing and posting the closing entries (Figure 5.2). These posted entries
will then translate into a post-closing trial balance, which is a trial balance that is prepared after all of the
closing entries have been recorded.

Figure 5.2

Final steps in the accounting cycle. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC

BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

287

THINK IT THROUGH
Should You Compromise to Please Your Supervisor?
You are an accountant for a small event-planning business. The business has been operating for several
years but does not have the resources for accounting software. This means you are preparing all steps in
the accounting cycle by hand.
It is the end of the month, and you have completed the post-closing trial balance. You notice that there is
still a service revenue account balance listed on this trial balance. Why is it considered an error to have a
revenue account on the post-closing trial balance? How do you fix this error?

Introduction to the Closing Entries
Companies are required to close their books at the end of each fiscal year so that they can prepare their
annual financial statements and tax returns. However, most companies prepare monthly financial statements
and close their books annually, so they have a clear picture of company performance during the year, and give
users timely information to make decisions.
Closing entries prepare a company for the next accounting period by clearing any outstanding balances in
certain accounts that should not transfer over to the next period. Closing, or clearing the balances, means
returning the account to a zero balance. Having a zero balance in these accounts is important so a company
can compare performance across periods, particularly with income. It also helps the company keep thorough
records of account balances affecting retained earnings. Revenue, expense, and dividend accounts affect
retained earnings and are closed so they can accumulate new balances in the next period, which is an
application of the time period assumption.
To further clarify this concept, balances are closed to assure all revenues and expenses are recorded in the
proper period and then start over the following period. The revenue and expense accounts should start at zero
each period, because we are measuring how much revenue is earned and expenses incurred during the
period. However, the cash balances, as well as the other balance sheet accounts, are carried over from the end
of a current period to the beginning of the next period.
For example, a store has an inventory account balance of $100,000. If the store closed at 11:59 p.m. on January
31, 2019, then the inventory balance when it reopened at 12:01 a.m. on February 1, 2019, would still be
$100,000. The balance sheet accounts, such as inventory, would carry over into the next period, in this case
February 2019.
The accounts that need to start with a clean or $0 balance going into the next accounting period are revenue,
income, and any dividends from January 2019. To determine the income (profit or loss) from the month of
January, the store needs to close the income statement information from January 2019. Zeroing January 2019
would then enable the store to calculate the income (profit or loss) for the next month (February 2019),
instead of merging it into January’s income and thus providing invalid information solely for the month of
February.
However, if the company also wanted to keep year-to-date information from month to month, a separate set
of records could be kept as the company progresses through the remaining months in the year. For our
purposes, assume that we are closing the books at the end of each month unless otherwise noted.

288

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Let’s look at another example to illustrate the point. Assume you own a small landscaping business. It is the
end of the year, December 31, 2018, and you are reviewing your financials for the entire year. You see that you
earned $120,000 this year in revenue and had expenses for rent, electricity, cable, internet, gas, and food that
totaled $70,000.
You also review the following information:

The next day, January 1, 2019, you get ready for work, but before you go to the office, you decide to review
your financials for 2019. What are your year-to-date earnings? So far, you have not worked at all in the current
year. What are your total expenses for rent, electricity, cable and internet, gas, and food for the current year?
You have also not incurred any expenses yet for rent, electricity, cable, internet, gas or food. This means that
the current balance of these accounts is zero, because they were closed on December 31, 2018, to complete
the annual accounting period.
Next, you review your assets and liabilities. What is your current bank account balance? What is the current
book value of your electronics, car, and furniture? What about your credit card balances and bank loans? Are
the value of your assets and liabilities now zero because of the start of a new year? Your car, electronics, and
furniture did not suddenly lose all their value, and unfortunately, you still have outstanding debt. Therefore,
these accounts still have a balance in the new year, because they are not closed, and the balances are carried
forward from December 31 to January 1 to start the new annual accounting period.
This is no different from what will happen to a company at the end of an accounting period. A company will
see its revenue and expense accounts set back to zero, but its assets and liabilities will maintain a balance.
Stockholders’ equity accounts will also maintain their balances. In summary, the accountant resets the
temporary accounts to zero by transferring the balances to permanent accounts.

LINK TO LEARNING
Understanding the accounting cycle and preparing trial balances is a practice valued internationally. The
Philippines Center for Entrepreneurship and the government of the Philippines hold regular seminars
going over this cycle with small business owners. They are also transparent with their internal trial
balances in several key government offices. Check out this article talking about the seminars on the
accounting cycle (https://openstax.org/l/50PhilAcctSem) and this public pre-closing trial balance
(https://openstax.org/l/50PhilTrialBal) presented by the Philippines Department of Health.

Temporary and Permanent Accounts
All accounts can be classified as either permanent (real) or temporary (nominal) (Figure 5.3).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

289

Permanent (real) accounts are accounts that transfer balances to the next period and include balance sheet
accounts, such as assets, liabilities, and stockholders’ equity. These accounts will not be set back to zero at the
beginning of the next period; they will keep their balances. Permanent accounts are not part of the closing
process.
Temporary (nominal) accounts are accounts that are closed at the end of each accounting period, and
include income statement, dividends, and income summary accounts. The new account, Income Summary, will
be discussed shortly. These accounts are temporary because they keep their balances during the current
accounting period and are set back to zero when the period ends. Revenue and expense accounts are closed
to Income Summary, and Income Summary and Dividends are closed to the permanent account, Retained
Earnings.

Figure 5.3

Location Chart for Financial Statement Accounts. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The income summary account is an intermediary between revenues and expenses, and the Retained Earnings
account. It stores all of the closing information for revenues and expenses, resulting in a “summary” of
income or loss for the period. The balance in the Income Summary account equals the net income or loss for
the period. This balance is then transferred to the Retained Earnings account.
Income summary is a nondefined account category. This means that it is not an asset, liability, stockholders’
equity, revenue, or expense account. The account has a zero balance throughout the entire accounting period
until the closing entries are prepared. Therefore, it will not appear on any trial balances, including the adjusted
trial balance, and will not appear on any of the financial statements.
You might be asking yourself, “is the Income Summary account even necessary?” Could we just close out
revenues and expenses directly into retained earnings and not have this extra temporary account? We could
do this, but by having the Income Summary account, you get a balance for net income a second time. This
gives you the balance to compare to the income statement, and allows you to double check that all income
statement accounts are closed and have correct amounts. If you put the revenues and expenses directly into
retained earnings, you will not see that check figure. No matter which way you choose to close, the same final
balance is in retained earnings.

290

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

YOUR TURN
Permanent versus Temporary Accounts
Following is a list of accounts. State whether each account is a permanent or temporary account.
A. rent expense
B. unearned revenue
C. accumulated depreciation, vehicle
D. common stock
E. fees revenue
F. dividends
G. prepaid insurance
H. accounts payable
Solution
A, E, and F are temporary; B, C, D, G, and H are permanent.

Let’s now look at how to prepare closing entries.

Journalizing and Posting Closing Entries
The eighth step in the accounting cycle is preparing closing entries, which includes journalizing and posting
the entries to the ledger.
Four entries occur during the closing process. The first entry closes revenue accounts to the Income Summary
account. The second entry closes expense accounts to the Income Summary account. The third entry closes
the Income Summary account to Retained Earnings. The fourth entry closes the Dividends account to Retained
Earnings. The information needed to prepare closing entries comes from the adjusted trial balance.
Let’s explore each entry in more detail using Printing Plus’s information from Analyzing and Recording
Transactions and The Adjustment Process as our example. The Printing Plus adjusted trial balance for January
31, 2019, is presented in Figure 5.4.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.4

291

Adjusted Trial Balance for Printing Plus. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The first entry requires revenue accounts close to the Income Summary account. To get a zero balance in a
revenue account, the entry will show a debit to revenues and a credit to Income Summary. Printing Plus has
$140 of interest revenue and $10,100 of service revenue, each with a credit balance on the adjusted trial
balance. The closing entry will debit both interest revenue and service revenue, and credit Income Summary.

The T-accounts after this closing entry would look like the following.

292

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Notice that the balances in interest revenue and service revenue are now zero and are ready to accumulate
revenues in the next period. The Income Summary account has a credit balance of $10,240 (the revenue sum).
The second entry requires expense accounts close to the Income Summary account. To get a zero balance in
an expense account, the entry will show a credit to expenses and a debit to Income Summary. Printing Plus
has $100 of supplies expense, $75 of depreciation expense–equipment, $5,100 of salaries expense, and $300 of
utility expense, each with a debit balance on the adjusted trial balance. The closing entry will credit Supplies
Expense, Depreciation Expense–Equipment, Salaries Expense, and Utility Expense, and debit Income Summary.

The T-accounts after this closing entry would look like the following.

Notice that the balances in the expense accounts are now zero and are ready to accumulate expenses in the
next period. The Income Summary account has a new credit balance of $4,665, which is the difference between
revenues and expenses (Figure 5.5). The balance in Income Summary is the same figure as what is reported on
Printing Plus’s Income Statement.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.5

293

Income Statement for Printing Plus. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC

BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Why are these two figures the same? The income statement summarizes your income, as does income
summary. If both summarize your income in the same period, then they must be equal. If they do not match,
then you have an error.
The third entry requires Income Summary to close to the Retained Earnings account. To get a zero balance in
the Income Summary account, there are guidelines to consider.
• If the balance in Income Summary before closing is a credit balance, you will debit Income Summary and
credit Retained Earnings in the closing entry. This situation occurs when a company has a net income.
• If the balance in Income Summary before closing is a debit balance, you will credit Income Summary and
debit Retained Earnings in the closing entry. This situation occurs when a company has a net loss.
Remember that net income will increase retained earnings, and a net loss will decrease retained earnings. The
Retained Earnings account increases on the credit side and decreases on the debit side.
Printing Plus has a $4,665 credit balance in its Income Summary account before closing, so it will debit Income
Summary and credit Retained Earnings.

The T-accounts after this closing entry would look like the following.

Notice that the Income Summary account is now zero and is ready for use in the next period. The Retained
Earnings account balance is currently a credit of $4,665.

294

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

The fourth entry requires Dividends to close to the Retained Earnings account. Remember from your past
studies that dividends are not expenses, such as salaries paid to your employees or staff. Instead, declaring
and paying dividends is a method utilized by corporations to return part of the profits generated by the
company to the owners of the company—in this case, its shareholders.
If dividends were not declared, closing entries would cease at this point. If dividends are declared, to get a zero
balance in the Dividends account, the entry will show a credit to Dividends and a debit to Retained Earnings. As
you will learn in Corporation Accounting, there are three components to the declaration and payment of
dividends. The first part is the date of declaration, which creates the obligation or liability to pay the dividend.
The second part is the date of record that determines who receives the dividends, and the third part is the date
of payment, which is the date that payments are made. Printing Plus has $100 of dividends with a debit
balance on the adjusted trial balance. The closing entry will credit Dividends and debit Retained Earnings.

The T-accounts after this closing entry would look like the following.

Why was income summary not used in the dividends closing entry? Dividends are not an income statement
account. Only income statement accounts help us summarize income, so only income statement accounts
should go into income summary.
Remember, dividends are a contra stockholders’ equity account. It is contra to retained earnings. If we pay out
dividends, it means retained earnings decreases. Retained earnings decreases on the debit side. The
remaining balance in Retained Earnings is $4,565 (Figure 5.6). This is the same figure found on the statement
of retained earnings.

Figure 5.6

Statement of Retained Earnings for Printing Plus. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The statement of retained earnings shows the period-ending retained earnings after the closing entries have
been posted. When you compare the retained earnings ledger (T-account) to the statement of retained
earnings, the figures must match. It is important to understand retained earnings is not closed out, it is only
updated. Retained Earnings is the only account that appears in the closing entries that does not close. You

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

295

should recall from your previous material that retained earnings are the earnings retained by the company
over time—not cash flow but earnings. Now that we have closed the temporary accounts, let’s review what the
post-closing ledger (T-accounts) looks like for Printing Plus.

T-Account Summary
The T-account summary for Printing Plus after closing entries are journalized is presented in Figure 5.7.

296

Figure 5.7

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

T-Account Summary. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)
Notice that revenues, expenses, dividends, and income summary all have zero balances. Retained earnings
maintains a $4,565 credit balance. The post-closing T-accounts will be transferred to the post-closing trial

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

balance, which is step 9 in the accounting cycle.

THINK IT THROUGH
Closing Entries
A company has revenue of $48,000 and total expenses of $52,000. What would the third closing entry be?
Why?

YOUR TURN
Frasker Corp. Closing Entries
Prepare the closing entries for Frasker Corp. using the adjusted trial balance provided.

Solution

297

298

5.2

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Prepare a Post-Closing Trial Balance

The ninth, and typically final, step of the process is to prepare a post-closing trial balance. The word “post” in
this instance means “after.” You are preparing a trial balance after the closing entries are complete.
Like all trial balances, the post-closing trial balance has the job of verifying that the debit and credit totals are
equal. The post-closing trial balance has one additional job that the other trial balances do not have. The postclosing trial balance is also used to double-check that the only accounts with balances after the closing entries
are permanent accounts. If there are any temporary accounts on this trial balance, you would know that there
was an error in the closing process. This error must be fixed before starting the new period.
The process of preparing the post-closing trial balance is the same as you have done when preparing the
unadjusted trial balance and adjusted trial balance. Only permanent account balances should appear on the
post-closing trial balance. These balances in post-closing T-accounts are transferred over to either the debit or
credit column on the post-closing trial balance. When all accounts have been recorded, total each column and
verify the columns equal each other.
The post-closing trial balance for Printing Plus is shown in Figure 5.8.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.8

299

Printing Plus’s Post-Closing Trial Balance. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Notice that only permanent accounts are included. All temporary accounts with zero balances were left out of
this statement. Unlike previous trial balances, the retained earnings figure is included, which was obtained
through the closing process.
At this point, the accounting cycle is complete, and the company can begin a new cycle in the next period. In
essence, the company’s business is always in operation, while the accounting cycle utilizes the cutoff of
month-end to provide financial information to assist and review the operations.
It is worth mentioning that there is one step in the process that a company may or may not include, step 10,
reversing entries. Reversing entries reverse an adjusting entry made in a prior period at the start of a new
period. We do not cover reversing entries in this chapter, but you might approach the subject in future
accounting courses.
Now that we have completed the accounting cycle, let’s take a look at another way the adjusted trial balance
assists users of information with financial decision-making.

LINK TO LEARNING
If you like quizzes, crossword puzzles, fill-in-the-blank, matching exercise, and word scrambles to help
you learn the material in this course, go to My Accounting Course (https://openstax.org/l/
50MyAcctCourse) for more. This website covers a variety of accounting topics including financial
accounting basics, accounting principles, the accounting cycle, and financial statements, all topics
introduced in the early part of this course.

300

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
The Importance of Understanding How to Complete the Accounting Cycle
Many students who enroll in an introductory accounting course do not plan to become accountants.
They will work in a variety of jobs in the business field, including managers, sales, and finance. In a real
company, most of the mundane work is done by computers. Accounting software can perform such tasks
as posting the journal entries recorded, preparing trial balances, and preparing financial statements.
Students often ask why they need to do all of these steps by hand in their introductory class, particularly
if they are never going to be an accountant. It is very important to understand that no matter what your
position, if you work in business you need to be able to read financial statements, interpret them, and
know how to use that information to better your business. If you have never followed the full process
from beginning to end, you will never understand how one of your decisions can impact the final
numbers that appear on your financial statements. You will not understand how your decisions can
affect the outcome of your company.
As mentioned previously, once you understand the effect your decisions will have on the bottom line on
your income statement and the balances in your balance sheet, you can use accounting software to do
all of the mundane, repetitive steps and use your time to evaluate the company based on what the
financial statements show. Your stockholders, creditors, and other outside professionals will use your
financial statements to evaluate your performance. If you evaluate your numbers as often as monthly,
you will be able to identify your strengths and weaknesses before any outsiders see them and make any
necessary changes to your plan in the following month.

Apply the Results from the Adjusted Trial Balance to Compute Current
Ratio and Working Capital Balance, and Explain How These Measures
5.3

Represent Liquidity
In The Adjustment Process, we were introduced to the idea of accrual-basis accounting, where revenues and
expenses must be recorded in the accounting period in which they were earned or incurred, no matter when
cash receipts or outlays occur. We also discussed cash-basis accounting, where income and expenses are
recognized when receipts and disbursements occur. In this chapter, we go into more depth about why a
company may choose accrual-basis accounting as opposed to cash-basis accounting.

LINK TO LEARNING
Go to the Internal Revenue Service’s website, and look at the most recently updated Pub 334 Tax Guide
for Small Business (https://openstax.org/l/50IRSPub334) to learn more about the rules for income tax
preparation for a small business.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

301

Cash Basis versus Accrual Basis Accounting
There are several reasons accrual-basis accounting is preferred to cash-basis accounting. Accrual-basis
accounting is required by US generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), as it typically provides a better
sense of the financial well-being of a company. Accrual-based accounting information allows management to
analyze a company’s progress, and management can use that information to improve their business. Accrual
accounting is also used to assist companies in securing financing, because banks will typically require a
company to provide accrual-basis financial income statements. The Internal Revenue Service might also
require businesses to report using accrual basis information when preparing tax returns. In addition,
companies with inventory must use accrual-based accounting for income tax purposes, though there are
exceptions to the general rule.
So why might a company use cash-basis accounting? Companies that do not sell stock publicly can use cashbasis instead of accrual-basis accounting for internal-management purposes and externally, as long as the
Internal Revenue Service does not prevent them from doing so, and they have no other reasons such as
agreements per a bank loan. Cash-basis accounting is a simpler accounting system to use than an accrualbasis accounting system when tracking real-time revenues and expenses.
Let’s take a look at one example illustrating why accrual-basis accounting might be preferred to cash-basis
accounting.
In the current year, a company had the following transactions:
January to March Transactions
Date

Transaction

Jan. 1

Annual insurance policy purchased for $6,000 cash

Jan. 8

Sent payment for December’s electricity bill, $135

Jan. 15

Performed services worth $2,500; customer asked to be billed

Jan. 31

Electricity used during January is estimated at $110

Feb. 16

Realized you forgot to pay January’s rent, so sent two months’ rent, $2,000

Feb. 20

Performed services worth $2,400; customer asked to be billed

Feb. 28

Electricity used during February is estimated at $150

Mar. 2

Paid March rent, $1,000

Mar. 10

Received all money owed from services performed in January and February

Mar. 14

Performed services worth $2,450. Received $1,800 cash

Mar. 30

Electricity used during March is estimated at $145

Table 5.1

302

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

IFRS CONNECTION
Issues in Comparing Closing Procedures
Regardless of whether a company uses US GAAP or International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS),
the closing and post-closing processes are the same. However, the results generated by these processes
are not the same. These differences can be seen most easily in the ratios formulated from the financial
statement information and used to assess various financial qualities of a company.
You have learned about the current ratio, which is used to assess a company’s ability to pay debts as they
come due. How could the use of IFRS versus US GAAP affect this ratio? US GAAP and IFRS most
frequently differ on how certain transactions are measured, or on the timing of measuring and reporting
that transaction. You will later learn about this in more detail, but for now we use a difference in
inventory measurement to illustrate the effect of the two different sets of standards on the current ratio.
US GAAP allows for three different ways to measure ending inventory balances: first-in, first-out (FIFO);
last-in, first-out (LIFO); and weighted average. IFRS only allows for FIFO and weighted average. If the
prices of inventory being purchased are rising, the FIFO method will result in a higher value of ending
inventory on the Balance Sheet than would the LIFO method.
Think about this in the context of the current ratio. Inventory is one component of current assets: the
numerator of the ratio. The higher the current assets (numerator), the higher is the current ratio.
Therefore, if you calculated the current ratio for a company that applied US GAAP, and then recalculated
the ratio assuming the company used IFRS, you would get not only different numbers for inventory (and
other accounts) in the financial statements, but also different numbers for the ratios.
This idea illustrates the impact the application of an accounting standard can have on the results of a
company’s financial statements and related ratios. Different standards produce different results.
Throughout the remainder of this course, you will learn more details about the similarities and
differences between US GAAP and IFRS, and how these differences impact financial reporting.

Remember, in a cash-basis system you will record the revenue when the money is received no matter when
the service is performed. There was no money received from customers in January or February, so the
company, under a cash-basis system, would not show any revenue in those months. In March they received
the $2,500 customers owed from January sales, $2,400 from customers for February sales, and $1,800 from
cash sales in March. This is a total of $6,700 cash received from customers in March. Since the cash was
received in March, the cash-basis system would record revenue in March.
In accrual accounting, we record the revenue as it is earned. There was $2,500 worth of service performed in
January, so that will show as revenue in January. The $2,400 earned in February is recorded in February, and
the $2,450 earned in March is recorded as revenue in March. Remember, it does not matter whether or not the
cash came in.
For expenses, the cash-basis system is going to record an expense the day the payment leaves company
hands. In January, the company purchased an insurance policy. The insurance policy is for the entire year, but
since the cash went to the insurance company in January, the company will record the entire amount as an
expense in January. The company paid the December electric bill in January. Even though the electricity was
used to earn revenue in December, the company will record it as an expense in January. Electricity used in

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

303

January, February, and March to help earn revenue in those months will show no expense because the bill has
not been paid. The company forgot to pay January’s rent in January, so no rent expense is recorded in January.
However, in February there is $2,000 worth of rent expense because the company paid for the two months in
February.
Under accrual accounting, expenses are recorded when they are incurred and not when paid. Electricity used
in a month to help earn revenue is recorded as an expense in that month whether the bill is paid or not. The
same is true for rent expense. Insurance expense is spread out over 12 months, and each month 1/12 of the
total insurance cost is expensed. The comparison of cash-basis and accrual-basis income statements is
presented in Figure 5.9.

Figure 5.9

Cash Basis versus Accrual Basis Accounting. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Fundamentals of Financial Ratios
One method used by everyone who evaluates financial statements is to calculate financial ratios.
Financial ratios take numbers from your income statements and/or your balance sheet to evaluate
important financial outcomes that will impact user decisions.
There are ratios to evaluate your liquidity, solvency, profitability, and efficiency. Liquidity ratios look at
your ability to pay the debts that you owe in the near future. Solvency will show if you can pay your bills
not only in the short term but also in the long term. Profitability ratios are calculated to see how much
profit is being generated from a company’s sales. Efficiency ratios will be calculated to see how efficient a
company is using its assets in running its business. You will be introduced to these ratios and how to
interpret them throughout this course.

Compare the two sets of income statements. The cash-basis system looks as though no revenue was earned in
the first two months, and expenses were excessive. Then in March it looks like the company earned a lot of
revenue. How realistic is this picture? Now look at the accrual basis figures. Here you see a better picture of
what really happened over the three months. Revenues and expenses stayed relatively even across periods.
This comparison can show the dangers of reporting in a cash-basis system. In a cash-basis system, the timing
of cash flows can make the business look very profitable one month and not profitable the next. If your
company was having a bad year and you do not want to report a loss, just do not pay the bills for the last
month of the year and you can suddenly show a profit in a cash-basis system. In an accrual-basis system, it

304

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

does not matter if you do not pay the bills, you still need to record the expenses and present an income
statement that accurately portrays what is happening in your company. The accrual-basis system lends itself
to more transparency and detail in reporting. This detail is carried over into what is known as a classified
balance sheet.

The Classified Balance Sheet
A classified balance sheet presents information on your balance sheet in a more informative structure, where
asset and liability categories are divided into smaller, more detailed sections. Classified balance sheets show
more about the makeup of our assets and liabilities, allowing us to better analyze the current health of our
company and make future strategic plans.
Assets can be categorized as current; property, plant, and equipment; long-term investments; intangibles;
and, if necessary, other assets. As you learned in Introduction to Financial Statements, a current asset (also
known as a short-term asset) is any asset that will be converted to cash, sold, or used up within one year, or one
operating cycle, whichever is longer. An operating cycle is the amount of time it takes a company to use its
cash to provide a product or service and collect payment from the customer (Figure 5.10). For a merchandising
firm that sells inventory, an operating cycle is the time it takes for the firm to use its cash to purchase
inventory, sell the inventory, and get its cash back from its customers.

Figure 5.10

Operating Cycle. (credit left: modification of “All Sales Final” by Dan Keck/Flickr, Public Domain;

credit center: modification of “Money Wallet Finance” by “Goumbik”/Pixabay, CC0; credit right: modification of
“Inventory for Seasonal Decoration” by Mirko Tobias Schäfer/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

LINK TO LEARNING
Newport News Shipbuilding is an American shipbuilder located in Newport News, Virginia. According to

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

305

information provided by the company, the company has designed and built 30 aircraft carriers in the past
75 years. That is 30 carriers in 75 years. Newport News constructed the USS Gerald R. Ford. It took the
company eight years to build the carrier, christening it in 2013. The ship then underwent rigorous testing
until it was finally delivered to its home port, Naval Station Norfolk in 2017. That is 12 years after work
commenced on the project.
With large shipbuilding projects that take many years to complete, the operating cycle for this type of
company could expand beyond a year mark, and Newport News would use this longer operating cycle
when dividing current and long-term assets and liabilities.
Learn more about Newport News and its parent company Huntington Ingalls Industries
(https://openstax.org/l/50IngallsShip) and see a time-lapse video of the construction of the carrier
(https://openstax.org/l/50ShipBuilding) . You can easily tell the passage of time if you watch the snow
come and go in the video.

If an asset does not meet the requirements of a current asset, then it is classified as a long-term asset. It can
be further defined as property, plant, and equipment; a long-term investment; or an intangible asset
(Figure 5.11). Property, plant, and equipment are tangible assets (those that have a physical presence) held
for more than one operating cycle or one year, whichever is longer. A long-term investment is stocks, bonds,
or other types of investments that management intends to hold for more than one operating cycle or one
year, whichever is longer. Intangible assets do not have a physical presence but give the company a longterm future benefit. Some examples include patents, copyrights, and trademarks.
Liabilities are classified as either current liabilities or long-term liabilities. Liabilities also use the one year, or
one operating cycle, for the cut-off between current and noncurrent. As we first discussed in Introduction to
Financial Statements, if the debt is due within one year or one operating cycle, whichever is longer, the liability
is a current liability. If the debt is settled outside one year or one operating cycle, whichever is longer, the
liability is a long-term liability.

306

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.11

Asset Classification Flowchart. A flowchart for asset classification can assist with financial

reporting. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

YOUR TURN
How to Classify Assets
Classify each of the following assets as current asset; property, plant, and equipment; long-term
investment; or intangible asset.
A. machine
B. patent
C. supplies

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

D. building
E. investment in bonds with intent to hold until maturity in 10 years
F. copyright
G. land being held for future office
H. prepaid insurance
I. accounts receivable
J. investment in stock that will be held for six months
Solution
A. property, plant, and equipment. B. intangible asset. C. current asset. D. property, plant, and
equipment. E. long-term investment. F. intangible asset. G. long-term investment. H. current asset. I.
current asset. J. current asset.
The land is considered a long-term investment, because it is not land being used currently by the
company to earn revenue. Buying real estate is an investment. If the company decided in the future that
it was not going to build the new office, it could sell the land and would probably be able to sell the land
for more than it was purchased for, because the value of real estate tends to go up over time. But like
any investment, there is the risk that the land might actually go down in value.
The investment in stock that we only plan to hold for six months will be called a marketable security in
the current asset section of the balance sheet.

As an example, the balance sheet in Figure 5.12 is classified.

307

308

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.12

Classified Balance Sheet for Magnificent Landscaping Service. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Interim Reporting in the Grocery Industry
Interim reporting helps determine how well a company is performing at a given time during the year.
Some companies revise their earnings estimates depending on how profitable the company has been up
until a certain point in time. The grocery industry, which includes both private and publicly traded
companies, performs the same exercise.
However, grocery companies use such information to inform other important business decisions.
Consider the last time you walked through the grocery store and purchased your favorite brand but
found another item out of stock. What if the next time you shop, the product you loved is no longer
carried, but the out-of-stock item is available?
Grocery store profitably is based on small margins of revenue on a multitude of products. The bar codes
scanned at checkout not only provide the price of a product but also track how much inventory has been
sold. The grocery store analyzes such information to determine how quickly the product turns over,

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

309

which drives profit on small margins. If a product sells well, the store might stock it all of the time, but if a
product does not sell quickly enough, it could be discontinued.

Using Classified Balance Sheets to Evaluate Liquidity
Categorizing assets and liabilities on a balance sheet helps a company evaluate its business. One way a
company can evaluate its business is with financial statement ratios. We consider two measures of liquidity,
working capital, and the current ratio. Let’s first explore this idea of liquidity.
We first described liquidity in Introduction to Financial Statements as the ability to convert assets into cash.
Liquidity is a company's ability to convert assets into cash in order to meet short-term cash needs, so it is very
important for a company to remain liquid. A critical piece of information to remember at this point is that most
companies use the accrual accounting method to determine and maintain their accounting records. This fact
means that even with a positive income position, as reflected by its income statement, a company can go
bankrupt due to poor cash flow. It is also important to note that even if a company has a lot of cash, it may still
be in bankruptcy trouble if all or much of that cash is borrowed. According to an article published in Money
magazine, one in four small businesses fail because of cash flow issues.

[1]

They are making a profit and seem

financially healthy but do not have cash when needed.
Companies should analyze liquidity constantly to avoid cash shortages that may result in a need for a shortterm loan. Intermittently taking out a short-term loan is often expected, but a company cannot keep coming
up short on cash every year if it is going to remain liquid. A seasonal business, such as a specialized holiday
retailer, may require a short-term loan to continue its operations during slower revenue-generating periods.
Companies will use numbers from their classified balance sheet to test for liquidity. They want to make sure
they have enough current assets to pay their current liabilities. Only cash is used to directly pay liabilities, but
other current assets, such as accounts receivable or short-term investments, might be sold for cash, converted
to cash, or used to bring in cash to pay liabilities.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Liquidity Is as Important as Net Worth
How does a company like Lehman Brothers Holdings, with over $639 billion in assets and $613 billion in
liabilities, go bankrupt? That question still confuses many, but it comes down to the fact that having
assets recorded on the books at their purchase price is not the same as the immediate value of the
assets. Lehman Brothers had a liquidity crisis that led to a solvency crisis, because Lehman Brothers
could not sell the assets on its books at book value to cover its short-term cash demands. Matt Johnston,
in an article for the online publication Coinmonks, puts it simply: “Liquidity is all about being able to
access cash when it’s needed. If you can settle your current obligations with ease, you’ve got liquidity. If
you’ve got debts coming due and you don’t have the cash to settle them, then you’ve got a liquidity
crisis.”

[2]

Continuing this Coinmonks discussion, the inability to timely pay debts leads to a business entity

1 Elaine Pofeldt. “5 Ways to Tackle the Problem That Kills One of Every Four Small Businesses.” Money. May 19, 2015. http://time.com/money/
3888448/cash-flow-small-business-startups/

310

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

becoming insolvent because bills cannot be paid on time and assets need to be written down. When
Lehman Brothers could not timely pay their bills in 2008, it went bankrupt, sending a shock throughout
the entire banking system. Accountants need to understand the differences between net worth, equity,
liquidity, and solvency, and be able to inform stakeholders of their organization’s actual financial
position, not just the recorded numbers on the balance sheet.

Two calculations a company might use to test for liquidity are working capital and the current ratio. Working
capital, which was first described in Introduction to Financial Statements, is found by taking the difference
between current assets and current liabilities.

A positive outcome means the company has enough current assets available to pay its current liabilities or
current debts. A negative outcome means the company does not have enough current assets to cover its
current liabilities and may have to arrange short-term financing. Though a positive working capital is
preferred, a company needs to make sure that there is not too much of a difference between current assets
and current liabilities. A company that has a high working capital might have too much money in current
assets that could be used for other company investments. Things such as industry and size of a company will
dictate what type of margin is best.
Let’s consider Printing Plus and its working capital (Figure 5.13).

2 Matt Johnson. “Revisiting the Lehman Brothers Collapse, the Business of Banking and Its Inherent Crises.” Coinmonks. February 1, 2018.
https://medium.com/coinmonks/revisiting-the-lehman-brothers-collapse-fb18769d6cf8

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.13

311

Balance Sheet for Printing Plus. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-

NC-SA 4.0 license)
Printing Plus’s current assets include cash, accounts receivable, interest receivable, and supplies. Their current
liabilities include accounts payable, salaries payable, and unearned revenue. The following is the computation
of working capital:

Working capital = $26,540 – $5,400 = $21,140
This means that you have more than enough working capital to pay the current liabilities your company has
recorded. This figure may seem high, but remember that this is the company’s first month of operations and
this much cash may need to be available for larger, long-term asset purchases. However, there is also the
possibility that the company might choose to identify long-term financing options for the acquisition of
expensive, long-term assets, assuming that it can qualify for the increased debt.
Notice that part of the current liability calculation is unearned revenue. If a company has a surplus of
unearned revenue, it can sometimes get away with less working capital, as it will need less cash to pay its bills.
However, the company must be careful, since the cash was recorded before providing the services or products
associated with the unearned revenue. This relationship is why the unearned revenue was initially created, and
there often will be necessary cash outflows associated with meeting the terms of the unearned revenue
creation.
Companies with inventory will usually need a higher working capital than a service company, as inventory can
tie up a large amount of a company’s cash with less cash available to pay its bills. Also, small companies will
normally need a higher working capital than larger companies, because it is harder for smaller companies to
get loans, and they usually pay a higher interest rate.

312

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

LINK TO LEARNING
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) released its 2015 Annual Global Working Capital Survey
(https://openstax.org/l/50PwC2015WorCap) which is a detailed study on working capital. Though the
report does not show the working capital calculation you just learned, there is very interesting
information about working capital in different industries, business sizes, and locations. Take a few
minutes and peruse this document.

The current ratio (also known as the working capital ratio), which was first described in Introduction to
Financial Statements, tells a company how many times over company current assets can cover current
liabilities. It is found by dividing current assets by current liabilities and is calculated as follows:

For example, if a company has current assets of $20,000 and current liabilities of $10,000, its current ratio is
$20,000/$10,000 = two times. This means the company has enough current assets to cover its current liabilities
twice. Ideally, many companies would like to maintain a 1.5:2 times current assets over current liabilities ratio.
However, depending on the company’s function or purpose, an optimal ratio could be lower or higher than
the previous recommendation. For example, many utilities do not have large fluctuations in anticipated
seasonal current ratios, so they might decide to maintain a current ratio of 1.25:1.5 times current assets over
current liabilities ratio, while a high-tech startup might want to maintain a ratio of 2.5:3 times current assets
over current liabilities ratio.
The current ratio for Printing Plus is $26,540/$5,400 = 4.91 times. That is a very high current ratio, but since the
business was just started, having more cash might allow the company to make larger purchases while still
paying its liabilities. However, this ratio might be a result of short-term conditions, so the company is advised
to still plan on maintaining a ratio that is considered both rational and not too risky.
Using ratios for a single year does not provide a broad picture. A company will get much better information if
it compares the working capital and current ratio numbers for several years so it can see increases, decreases,
and where numbers remain fairly consistent. Companies can also benefit from comparing this financial data to
that of other companies in the industry.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Computers Still Use Debits and Credits: Check behind the Dashboard for Fraud
Newly hired accountants are often sat at a computer to work off of a dashboard, which is a computer
screen where entries are made into the accounting system. New accountants working with modern
accounting software may not be aware that their software uses the debit and credit system you learned
about, and that the system may automatically close the books without the accountant’s review of closing
entries. Manually closing the books gives accountants a chance to review the balances of different

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

313

accounts; if accountants do not review the entries, they will not know what is occurring in the accounting
system or in their organization’s financial statements.
Many accounting systems automatically close the books if the command is made in the system. While
debits and credits are being entered and may not have been reviewed, the system can be instructed to
close out the revenue and expense accounts and create an Income Statement.
A knowledgeable accountant can review entries within the software’s audit function. The accountant will
be able to look at every entry, its description, both sides of the entry (debit and credit), and any changes
made in the entry. This review is important in determining if any incorrect entry was either a mistake or
fraud. The accountant can see who made the entry and how the entry occurred in the accounting system.
To ensure the integrity of the system, each person working in the system must have a unique user
identification, and no users may know others’ passwords. If there is an entry or updated entry, the
accountant will be able to see the entry in the audit function of the software. If an employee has changed
expense items to pay his or her personal bills, the accountant can see the change. Similarly, changes in
transaction dates can be reviewed to determine whether they are fraudulent. Professional accountants
know what goes on in their organization’s accounting system.

5.4

Appendix: Complete a Comprehensive Accounting Cycle for a Business

We have gone through the entire accounting cycle for Printing Plus with the steps spread over three chapters.
Let’s go through the complete accounting cycle for another company here. The full accounting cycle diagram
is presented in Figure 5.14.

314

Figure 5.14

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

The Accounting Cycle. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)
We next take a look at a comprehensive example that works through the entire accounting cycle for Clip’em
Cliff. Clifford Girard retired from the US Marine Corps after 20 years of active duty. Cliff decides it would be fun
to become a barber and open his own shop called “Clip’em Cliff.” He will run the barber shop out of his home
for the first couple of months while he identifies a new location for his shop.
Since his Marines career included several years of logistics, he is also going to operate a consulting practice
where he will help budding barbers create a barbering practice. He will charge a flat fee or a per hour charge.
His consulting practice will be recognized as service revenue and will provide additional revenue while he
develops his barbering practice.
He obtains a barber’s license after the required training and is ready to open his shop on August 1. Table 5.2
shows his transactions from the first month of business.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

315

Transactions for August
Date

Transaction

Aug. 1

Cliff issues $70,000 shares of common stock for cash.

Aug. 3

Cliff purchases barbering equipment for $45,000; $37,500 was paid immediately with cash, and
the remaining $7,500 was billed to Cliff with payment due in 30 days. He decided to buy used
equipment, because he was not sure if he truly wanted to run a barber shop. He assumed that
he will replace the used equipment with new equipment within a couple of years.

Aug. 6

Cliff purchases supplies for $300 cash.

Aug. 10

Cliff provides $4,000 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the services.

Aug. 13

Cliff pays a $75 utility bill with cash.

Aug. 14

Cliff receives $3,200 cash in advance from a customer for services not yet rendered.

Aug. 16

Cliff distributed $150 cash in dividends to stockholders.

Aug. 17

Cliff receives $5,200 cash from a customer for services rendered.

Aug. 19

Cliff paid $2,000 toward the outstanding liability from the August 3 transaction.

Aug. 22

Cliff paid $4,600 cash in salaries expense to employees.

Aug. 28

The customer from the August 10 transaction pays $1,500 cash toward Cliff’s account.

Table 5.2
Transaction 1: On August 1, 2019, Cliff issues $70,000 shares of common stock for cash.
Analysis:
• Clip’em Cliff now has more cash. Cash is an asset, which is increasing on the debit side.
• When the company issues stock, this yields a higher common stock figure than before issuance. The
common stock account is increasing on the credit side.

Transaction 2: On August 3, 2019, Cliff purchases barbering equipment for $45,000; $37,500 was paid
immediately with cash, and the remaining $7,500 was billed to Cliff with payment due in 30 days.

316

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Analysis:
• Clip’em Cliff now has more equipment than before. Equipment is an asset, which is increasing on the
debit side for $45,000.
• Cash is used to pay for $37,500. Cash is an asset, decreasing on the credit side.
• Cliff asked to be billed, which means he did not pay cash immediately for $7,500 of the equipment.
Accounts Payable is used to signal this short-term liability. Accounts payable is increasing on the credit
side.

Transaction 3: On August 6, 2019, Cliff purchases supplies for $300 cash.
Analysis:
• Clip’em Cliff now has less cash. Cash is an asset, which is decreasing on the credit side.
• Supplies, an asset account, is increasing on the debit side.

Transaction 4: On August 10, 2019, provides $4,000 in services to a customer who asks to be billed for the
services.
Analysis:
• Clip’em Cliff provided service, thus earning revenue. Revenue impacts equity, and increases on the credit
side.
• The customer did not pay immediately for the service and owes Cliff payment. This is an Accounts
Receivable for Cliff. Accounts Receivable is an asset that is increasing on the debit side.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

317

Transaction 5: On August 13, 2019, Cliff pays a $75 utility bill with cash.
Analysis:
• Clip’em Cliff now has less cash than before. Cash is an asset that is decreasing on the credit side.
• Utility payments are billed expenses. Utility Expense negatively impacts equity, and increases on the debit
side.

Transaction 6: On August 14, 2019, Cliff receives $3,200 cash in advance from a customer for services to be
rendered.
Analysis:
• Clip’em Cliff now has more cash. Cash is an asset, which is increasing on the debit side.
• The customer has not yet received services but already paid the company. This means the company owes
the customer the service. This creates a liability to the customer, and revenue cannot yet be recognized.
Unearned Revenue is the liability account, which is increasing on the credit side.

318

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Transaction 7: On August 16, 2019, Cliff distributed $150 cash in dividends to stockholders.
Analysis:
• Clip’em Cliff now has less cash. Cash is an asset, which is decreasing on the credit side.
• When the company pays out dividends, this decreases equity and increases the dividends account.
Dividends increases on the debit side.

Transaction 8: On August 17, 2019, Cliff receives $5,200 cash from a customer for services rendered.
Analysis:
• Clip’em Cliff now has more cash than before. Cash is an asset, which is increasing on the debit side.
• Service was provided, which means revenue can be recognized. Service Revenue increases equity. Service
Revenue is increasing on the credit side.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

319

Transaction 9: On August 19, 2019, Cliff paid $2,000 toward the outstanding liability from the August 3
transaction.
Analysis:
• Clip’em Cliff now has less cash. Cash is an asset, which is decreasing on the credit side.
• Accounts Payable is a liability account, decreasing on the debit side.

Transaction 10: On August 22, 2019, Cliff paid $4,600 cash in salaries expense to employees.
Analysis:
• Clip’em Cliff now has less cash. Cash is an asset, which is decreasing on the credit side.
• When the company pays salaries, this is an expense to the business. Salaries Expense reduces equity by
increasing on the debit side.

320

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Transaction 11: On August 28, 2019, the customer from the August 10 transaction pays $1,500 cash toward
Cliff’s account.
Analysis:
• The customer made a partial payment on their outstanding account. This reduces Accounts Receivable.
Accounts Receivable is an asset account decreasing on the credit side.
• Cash is an asset, increasing on the debit side.

The complete journal for August is presented in Figure 5.15.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.15

321

Journal Entries for August. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA

4.0 license)
Once all journal entries have been created, the next step in the accounting cycle is to post journal information
to the ledger. The ledger is visually represented by T-accounts. Cliff will go through each transaction and
transfer the account information into the debit or credit side of that ledger account. Any account that has
more than one transaction needs to have a final balance calculated. This happens by taking the difference
between the debits and credits in an account.
Clip’em Cliff’s ledger represented by T-accounts is presented in Figure 5.16.

322

Figure 5.16

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

T-Accounts for August. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)
You will notice that the sum of the asset account balances in Cliff’s ledger equals the sum of the liability and
equity account balances at $83,075. The final debit or credit balance in each account is transferred to the
unadjusted trial balance in the corresponding debit or credit column as illustrated in Figure 5.17.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.17

323

Unadjusted Trial Balance for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Once all of the account balances are transferred to the correct columns, each column is totaled. The total in
the debit column must match the total in the credit column to remain balanced. The unadjusted trial balance
for Clip’em Cliff appears in Figure 5.18.

Figure 5.18

Unadjusted Trial Balance for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The unadjusted trial balance shows a debit and credit balance of $87,900. Remember, the unadjusted trial
balance is prepared before any period-end adjustments are made.
On August 31, Cliff has the transactions shown in Table 5.3 requiring adjustment.

324

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

August 31 Transactions
Date
Aug. 31

Transaction
Cliff took an inventory of supplies and discovered that $250 of supplies remain unused at the
end of the month.

Aug. 31

The equipment purchased on August 3 depreciated $2,500 during the month of August.

Aug. 31

Clip’em Cliff performed $1,100 of services during August for the customer from the August 14
transaction.

Aug. 31

Reviewing the company bank statement, Clip’em Cliff discovers $350 of interest earned during
the month of August that was previously uncollected and unrecorded. As a new customer for
the bank, the interest was paid by a bank that offered an above-market-average interest rate.

Aug. 31

Unpaid and previously unrecorded income taxes for the month are $3,400. The tax payment was
to cover his federal quarterly estimated income taxes. He lives in a state that does not have an
individual income tax

Table 5.3
Adjusting Transaction 1: Cliff took an inventory of supplies and discovered that $250 of supplies remain
unused at the end of the month.
Analysis:
• $250 of supplies remain at the end of August. The company began the month with $300 worth of supplies.
Therefore, $50 of supplies were used during the month and must be recorded (300 – 250). Supplies is an
asset that is decreasing (credit).
• Supplies is a type of prepaid expense, that when used, becomes an expense. Supplies Expense would
increase (debit) for the $50 of supplies used during August.

Adjusting Transaction 2: The equipment purchased on August 3 depreciated $2,500 during the month of
August.
Analysis:
• Equipment cost of $2,500 was allocated during August. This depreciation will affect the Accumulated
Depreciation–Equipment account and the Depreciation Expense–Equipment account. While we are not

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

325

doing depreciation calculations here, you will come across more complex calculations, such as
depreciation in Long-Term Assets.
• Accumulated Depreciation–Equipment is a contra asset account (contrary to Equipment) and increases
(credit) for $2,500.
• Depreciation Expense–Equipment is an expense account that is increasing (debit) for $2,500.

Adjusting Transaction 3: Clip’em Cliff performed $1,100 of services during August for the customer from the
August 14 transaction.
Analysis:
• The customer from the August 14 transaction gave the company $3,200 in advanced payment for services.
By the end of August the company had earned $1,100 of the advanced payment. This means that the
company still has yet to provide $2,100 in services to that customer.
• Since some of the unearned revenue is now earned, Unearned Revenue would decrease. Unearned
Revenue is a liability account and decreases on the debit side.
• The company can now recognize the $1,100 as earned revenue. Service Revenue increases (credit) for
$1,100.

Adjusting Transaction 4: Reviewing the company bank statement, Clip’em Cliff identifies $350 of interest
earned during the month of August that was previously unrecorded.
Analysis:
• Interest is revenue for the company on money kept in a money market account at the bank. The company
only sees the bank statement at the end of the month and needs to record as received interest revenue
reflected on the bank statement.

326

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

• Interest Revenue is a revenue account that increases (credit) for $350.
• Since Clip’em Cliff has yet to collect this interest revenue, it is considered a receivable. Interest Receivable
increases (debit) for $350.

Adjusting Transaction 5: Unpaid and previously unrecorded income taxes for the month are $3,400.
Analysis:
• Income taxes are an expense to the business that accumulate during the period but are only paid at
predetermined times throughout the year. This period did not require payment but did accumulate
income tax.
• Income Tax Expense is an expense account that negatively affects equity. Income Tax Expense increases
on the debit side.
• The company owes the tax money but has not yet paid, signaling a liability. Income Tax Payable is a
liability that is increasing on the credit side.

The summary of adjusting journal entries for Clip’em Cliff is presented in Figure 5.19.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.19

327

Adjusting Journal Entries for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Now that all of the adjusting entries are journalized, they must be posted to the ledger. Posting adjusting
entries is the same process as posting the general journal entries. Each journalized account figure will transfer
to the corresponding ledger account on either the debit or credit side as illustrated in Figure 5.20.

Figure 5.20

Posting Ledger Entries for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
We would normally use a general ledger, but for illustrative purposes, we are using T-accounts to represent
the ledgers. The T-accounts after the adjusting entries are posted are presented in Figure 5.21.

328

Figure 5.21

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Ledger Entries (in T-Accounts) for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
You will notice that the sum of the asset account balances equals the sum of the liability and equity account
balances at $80,875. The final debit or credit balance in each account is transferred to the adjusted trial
balance, the same way the general ledger transferred to the unadjusted trial balance.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

329

The next step in the cycle is to prepare the adjusted trial balance. Clip’em Cliff’s adjusted trial balance is shown
in Figure 5.22.

Figure 5.22

Adjusted Trial Balance for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The adjusted trial balance shows a debit and credit balance of $94,150. Once the adjusted trial balance is
prepared, Cliff can prepare his financial statements (step 7 in the cycle). We only prepare the income
statement, statement of retained earnings, and the balance sheet. The statement of cash flows is discussed in
detail in Statement of Cash Flows.
To prepare your financial statements, you want to work with your adjusted trial balance.
Remember, revenues and expenses go on an income statement. Dividends, net income (loss), and retained
earnings balances go on the statement of retained earnings. On a balance sheet you find assets, contra assets,
liabilities, and stockholders’ equity accounts.
The income statement for Clip’em Cliff is shown in Figure 5.23.

330

Figure 5.23

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Income Statement for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC

BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Note that expenses were only $25 less than revenues. For the first month of operations, Cliff welcomes any
income. Cliff will want to increase income in the next period to show growth for investors and lenders.
Next, Cliff prepares the following statement of retained earnings (Figure 5.24).

Figure 5.24

Statement of Retained Earnings for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The beginning retained earnings balance is zero because Cliff just began operations and does not have a
balance to carry over to a future period. The ending retained earnings balance is –$125. You probably never
want to have a negative value on your retained earnings statement, but this situation is not totally unusual for
an organization in its initial operations. Cliff will want to improve this outcome going forward. It might make
sense for Cliff to not pay dividends until he increases his net income.
Cliff then prepares the balance sheet for Clip’em Cliff as shown in Figure 5.25.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.25

331

Balance Sheet for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-

NC-SA 4.0 license)
The balance sheet shows total assets of $80,875, which equals total liabilities and equity. Now that the financial
statements are complete, Cliff will go to the next step in the accounting cycle, preparing and posting closing
entries. To do this, Cliff needs his adjusted trial balance information.
Cliff will only close temporary accounts, which include revenues, expenses, income summary, and dividends.
The first entry closes revenue accounts to income summary. To close revenues, Cliff will debit revenue
accounts and credit income summary.

The second entry closes expense accounts to income summary. To close expenses, Cliff will credit expense
accounts and debit income summary.

332

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

The third entry closes income summary to retained earnings. To find the balance, take the difference between
the income summary amount in the first and second entries (10,650 – 10,625). To close income summary, Cliff
would debit Income Summary and credit Retained Earnings.

The fourth closing entry closes dividends to retained earnings. To close dividends, Cliff will credit Dividends,
and debit Retained Earnings.

Once all of the closing entries are journalized, Cliff will post this information to the ledger. The closed accounts
with their final balances, as well as Retained Earnings, are presented in Figure 5.26.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.26

333

Closed Accounts with Final Balances for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Now that the temporary accounts are closed, they are ready for accumulation in the next period.
The last step for the month of August is step 9, preparing the post-closing trial balance. The post-closing trial
balance should only contain permanent account information. No temporary accounts should appear on this
trial balance. Clip’em Cliff’s post-closing trial balance is presented in Figure 5.27.

334

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Figure 5.27

Post-Closing Trial Balance for Clip’em Cliff. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
At this point, Cliff has completed the accounting cycle for August. He is now ready to begin the process again
for September, and future periods.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Reversing Entries
One step in the accounting cycle that we did not cover is reversing entries. Reversing entries can be
made at the beginning of a new period to certain accruals. The company will reverse adjusting entries
made in the prior period to the revenue and expense accruals.
It can be difficult to keep track of accruals from prior periods, as support documentation may not be
readily available in current or future periods. This requires an accountant to remember when these
accruals came from. By reversing these accruals, there is a reduced risk for counting revenues and
expenses twice. The support documentation received in the current or future period for an accrual will
be easier to match to prior revenues and expenses with the reversal.

LINK TO LEARNING
As we have learned, the current ratio shows how well a company can cover short-term debt with shortterm assets. Look through the balance sheet in the 2017 Annual Report for Target (https://openstax.org/
l/50Target2017Bal) and calculate the current ratio. What does the outcome mean for Target?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

THINK IT THROUGH
Using Liquidity Ratios to Evaluate Financial Performance
You own a landscaping business that has just begun operations. You made several expensive equipment
purchases in your first month to get your business started. These purchases very much reduced your
cash-on-hand, and in turn your liquidity suffered in the following months with a low working capital and
current ratio.
Your business is now in its eighth month of operation, and while you are starting to see a growth in sales,
you are not seeing a significant change in your working capital or current ratio from the low numbers in
your early months. What could you attribute to this stagnancy in liquidity? Is there anything you can do
as a business owner to better these liquidity measurements? What will happen if you cannot change
your liquidity or it gets worse?

335

336

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Key Terms
classified balance sheet presents information on your balance sheet in a more informative structure, where
asset and liability categories are divided into smaller, more detailed sections
closing returning the account to a zero balance
closing entry prepares a company for the next accounting period by clearing any outstanding balances in
certain accounts that should not transfer over to the next period
current ratio current assets divided by current liabilities; used to determine a company’s liquidity (ability to
meet short-term obligations)
income summary intermediary between revenues and expenses, and the Retained Earnings account,
storing all the closing information for revenues and expenses, resulting in a “summary” of income or loss
for the period
intangible asset asset with financial value but no physical presence; examples include copyrights, patents,
goodwill, and trademarks
liquidity ability to convert assets into cash in order to meet primarily short-term cash needs or emergencies
long-term investment stocks, bonds, or other types of investments held for more than one operating cycle
or one year, whichever is longer
long-term liability debt settled outside one year or one operating cycle, whichever is longer
operating cycle amount of time it takes a company to use its cash to provide a product or service and collect
payment from the customer
permanent (real) account account that transfers balances to the next period, and includes balance sheet
accounts, such as assets, liabilities, and stockholder’s equity
post-closing trial balance trial balance that is prepared after all the closing entries have been recorded
property, plant, and equipment tangible assets (those that have a physical presence) held for more than
one operating cycle or one year, whichever is longer
temporary (nominal) account account that is closed at the end of each accounting period, and includes
income statement, dividends, and income summary accounts
working capital current assets less current liabilities; sometimes used as a measure of liquidity

Summary
5.1 Describe and Prepare Closing Entries for a Business
• Closing entries: Closing entries prepare a company for the next period and zero out balance in temporary
accounts.
• Purpose of closing entries: Closing entries are necessary because they help a company review income
accumulation during a period, and verify data figures found on the adjusted trial balance.
• Permanent accounts: Permanent accounts do not close and are accounts that transfer balances to the
next period. They include balance sheet accounts, such as assets, liabilities, and stockholder’s equity
• Temporary accounts: Temporary accounts are closed at the end of each accounting period and include
income statement, dividends, and income summary accounts.
• Income Summary: The Income Summary account is an intermediary between revenues and expenses,
and the Retained Earnings account. It stores all the closing information for revenues and expenses,
resulting in a “summary” of income or loss for the period.
• Recording closing entries: There are four closing entries; closing revenues to income summary, closing
expenses to income summary, closing income summary to retained earnings, and close dividends to

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

337

retained earnings.
• Posting closing entries: Once all closing entries are complete, the information is transferred to the
general ledger T-accounts. Balances in temporary accounts will show a zero balance.
5.2 Prepare a Post-Closing Trial Balance
• Post-closing trial balance: The post-closing trial balance is prepared after closing entries have been
posted to the ledger. This trial balance only includes permanent accounts.
5.3 Apply the Results from the Adjusted Trial Balance to Compute Current Ratio and Working Capital
Balance, and Explain How These Measures Represent Liquidity
• Cash-basis versus accrual-basis system: The cash-basis system delays revenue and expense recognition
until cash is collected, which can mislead investors about the daily operations of a business. The accrualbasis system recognizes revenues and expenses in the period in which they were earned or incurred,
allowing for an even distribution of income and a more accurate business of daily operations.
• Classified balance sheet: The classified balance sheet breaks down assets and liabilities into subcategories
focusing on current and long-term classifications. This allows investors to see company position in both
the short term and long term.
• Liquidity: Liquidity means a business has enough cash available to pay bills as they come due. Being too
liquid can mean that a company is not using its assets efficiently.
• Working capital: Working capital shows how efficiently a company operates. The formula is current assets
minus current liabilities.
• Current ratio: The current ratio shows how many times over a company can cover its liabilities. It is found
by dividing current assets by current liabilities.
5.4 Appendix: Complete a Comprehensive Accounting Cycle for a Business
• The comprehensive accounting cycle is the process in which transactions are recorded in the accounting
records and are ultimately reflected in the ending period balances on the financial statements.
• Comprehensive accounting cycle for a business: A service business is taken through the comprehensive
accounting cycle, starting with the formation of the entity, recording all necessary journal entries for its
transactions, making all required adjusting and closing journal entries, and culminating in the preparation
of all requisite financial statements

Multiple Choice
1.

5.1 Which of the following accounts is considered a temporary or nominal account?
A.

Fees Earned Revenue

B.

Prepaid Advertising

C.

Unearned Service Revenue

D.

Prepaid Insurance

2.

5.1 Which of the following accounts is considered a permanent or real account?
A.

Interest Revenue

B.

Prepaid Insurance

C.

Insurance Expense

D.

Supplies Expense

338

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

3.

5.1 If a journal entry includes a debit or credit to the Cash account, it is most likely which of the

following?
A.

a closing entry

B.

an adjusting entry

C.

an ordinary transaction entry

D.

outside of the accounting cycle

4.

5.1 If a journal entry includes a debit or credit to the Retained Earnings account, it is most likely which of

the following?
A.

a closing entry

B.

an adjusting entry

C.

an ordinary transaction entry

D.

outside of the accounting cycle

5.

5.1 Which of these accounts would be present in the closing entries?
A.

Dividends

B.

Accounts Receivable

C.

Unearned Service Revenue

D.

Sales Tax Payable

6.

5.1 Which of these accounts would not be present in the closing entries?
A.

Utilities Expense

B.

Fees Earned Revenue

C.

Insurance Expense

D.

Dividends Payable

7.

5.1 Which of these accounts is never closed?
A.

Dividends

B.

Retained Earnings

C.

Service Fee Revenue

D.

Income Summary

8.

5.1 Which of these accounts is never closed?
A.

Prepaid Rent

B.

Income Summary

C.

Rent Revenue

D.

Rent Expense

9.

5.1 Which account would be credited when closing the account for fees earned for the year?
A.

Accounts Receivable

B.

Fees Earned Revenue

C.

Unearned Fee Revenue

D.

Income Summary

10.

5.1 Which account would be credited when closing the account for rent expense for the year?
A.

Prepaid Rent

B.

Rent Expense

C.

Rent Revenue

D.

Unearned Rent Revenue

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

11.

339

5.2 Which of these accounts is included in the post-closing trial balance?
A.

Sales Revenue

B.

Salaries Expense

C.

Retained Earnings

D.

Dividends

12.

5.2 Which of these accounts is not included in the post-closing trial balance?
A.

Land

B.

Notes Payable

C.

Retained Earnings

D.

Dividends

13.

5.2 On which of the following would the year-end Retained Earnings balance be stated correctly?
A.

Unadjusted Trial Balance

B.

Adjusted Trial Balance

C.

Post-Closing Trial Balance

D.

The Worksheet

14.

5.2 Which of these accounts is included in the post-closing trial balance?
A.

Supplies Expense

B.

Accounts Payable

C.

Sales Revenue

D.

Insurance Expense

15.

5.3 If current assets are $112,000 and current liabilities are $56,000, what is the current ratio?
A.

200 percent

B.

50 percent

C.

2.0

D.

$50,000

16.

5.3 If current assets are $100,000 and current liabilities are $42,000, what is the working capital?
A.

200 percent

B.

50 percent

C.

2.0

D.

$58,000

Questions
1.

5.1 Explain what is meant by the term real accounts (also known as permanent accounts).

2.

5.1 Explain what is meant by the term nominal accounts (also known as temporary accounts).

3.

5.1 What is the purpose of the closing entries?

4.

5.1 What would happen if the company failed to make closing entries at the end of the year?

5.

5.1 Which of these account types (Assets, Liabilities, Equity, Revenue, Expense, Dividend) are credited in

the closing entries? Why?

340

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

6.

5.1 Which of these account types (Assets, Liabilities, Equity, Revenue, Expense, Dividend) are debited in

the closing entries? Why?
7.

5.1 The account called Income Summary is often used in the closing entries. Explain this account’s

purpose and how it is used.
8.

5.1 What are the four entries required for closing, assuming that the Income Summary account is used?

9.

5.1 After the first two closing entries are made, Income Summary has a credit balance of $125,500. What

does this indicate about the company’s net income or loss?
10.

5.1 After the first two closing entries are made, Income Summary has a debit balance of $22,750. What

does this indicate about the company’s net income or loss?
11.

5.2 What account types are included in a post-closing trial balance?

12.

5.2 Which of the basic financial statements can be directly tied to the post-closing trial balance? Why is

this so?
13.

5.3 Describe the calculation required to compute working capital. Explain the significance.

14.

5.3 Describe the calculation required to compute the current ratio. Explain the significance.

15.

5.4 Describe the progression of the three trial balances that a company would have during the period,

and explain the difference between the three.

Exercise Set A
EA1.

5.1 Identify whether each of the following accounts is nominal/temporary or real/permanent.

A.

Accounts Receivable

B.

Fees Earned Revenue

C.

Utility Expense

D.

Prepaid Rent

EA2.

5.1 For each of the following accounts, identify whether it is nominal/temporary or real/permanent,

and whether it is reported on the Balance Sheet or the Income Statement.
A.

Interest Expense

B.

Buildings

C.

Interest Payable

D.

Unearned Rent Revenue

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

EA3.

5.1 For each of the following accounts, identify whether it would be closed at year-end (yes or no) and

on which financial statement the account would be reported (Balance Sheet, Income Statement, or Retained
Earnings Statement).
A.

Accounts Payable

B.

Accounts Receivable

C.

Cash

D.

Dividends

E.

Fees Earned Revenue

F.

Insurance Expense

G.

Prepaid Insurance

H. Supplies
EA4.

5.1 The following accounts and normal balances existed at year-end. Make the four journal entries

required to close the books:

EA5.

5.1 The following accounts and normal balances existed at year-end. Make the four journal entries

required to close the books:

EA6.

341

5.1 Use the following excerpts from the year-end Adjusted Trial Balance to prepare the four journal

entries required to close the books:

342

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

EA7.

5.1 Use the following T-accounts to prepare the four journal entries required to close the books:

EA8.

5.1 Use the following T-accounts to prepare the four journal entries required to close the books:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

EA9.

343

5.2 Identify whether each of the following accounts would be listed in the company’s Post-Closing

Trial Balance.
A.

Accounts Payable

B.

Advertising Expense

C.

Dividends

D.

Fees Earned Revenue

E.

Prepaid Advertising

F.

Supplies

G.

Supplies Expense

H. Unearned Fee Revenue
EA10.

5.2 Identify which of the following accounts would not be listed on the company’s Post-Closing Trial

Balance.

EA11.

5.3 For each of the following accounts, identify in which section of the classified balance sheet it

would be presented: current assets, property, intangibles, other assets, current liabilities, long-term liabilities,
or stockholder’s equity.
A.

Accounts Payable

B.

Accounts Receivable

C.

Cash

D.

Equipment

E.

Land

F.

Notes Payable (due two years later)

G.

Prepaid Insurance

H. Supplies
EA12.

5.3 Using the following Balance Sheet summary information, calculate for the two years presented:

A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

344

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

EA13.

5.3 Using the following account balances, calculate for the two years presented:

A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

EA14.

5.3 Using the following Balance Sheet summary information, calculate for the two companies

presented:
A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

Then:
A.

EA15.

evaluate which company’s liquidity position appears stronger, and why.

5.3 Using the following account balances, calculate:

A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

5.1 Identify whether each of the following accounts are nominal/temporary or real/permanent.

A.

Rent Expense

B.

Unearned Service Fee Revenue

C.

Interest Revenue

D.

Accounts Payable

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

EB2.

345

5.1 For each of the following accounts, identify whether it is nominal/temporary or real/permanent,

and whether it is reported on the Balance Sheet or the Income Statement.
A.

Salaries Payable

B.

Sales Revenue

C.

Salaries Expense

D.

Prepaid Insurance

EB3.

5.1 For each of the following accounts, identify whether it would be closed at year-end (yes or no) and

on which financial statement the account would be reported (Balance Sheet, Income Statement, or Retained
Earnings Statement).
A.

Retained Earnings

B.

Prepaid Rent

C.

Rent Expense

D.

Rent Revenue

E.

Salaries Expense

F.

Salaries Payable

G.

Supplies Expense

H. Unearned Rent Revenue
EB4.

5.1 The following accounts and normal balances existed at year-end. Make the four journal entries

required to close the books:

EB5.

5.1 The following accounts and normal balances existed at year-end. Make the four journal entries

required to close the books:

EB6.

5.1 Use the following excerpts from the year-end Adjusted Trial Balance to prepare the four journal

entries required to close the books:

346

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

EB7.

5.1 Use the following T-accounts to prepare the four journal entries required to close the books:

EB8.

5.1 Use the following T-accounts to prepare the four journal entries required to close the books:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

EB9.

347

5.2 Identify which of the following accounts would be listed on the company’s Post-Closing Trial

Balance.
A.

Accounts Receivable

B.

Accumulated Depreciation

C.

Cash

D.

Office Expense

E.

Note Payable

F.

Rent Revenue

G.

Retained Earnings

H. Unearned Rent Revenue
EB10.

5.2 Identify which of the following accounts would not be listed on the company’s Post-Closing Trial

Balance.

EB11.

5.3 For each of the following accounts, identify in which section of the classified balance sheet it

would be presented: current assets, property, intangibles, other assets, current liabilities, long-term liabilities,
or stockholder’s equity.
A.

Building

B.

Cash

C.

Common Stock

D.

Copyright

E.

Prepaid Advertising

F.

Notes Payable (due six months later)

G.

Taxes Payable

H. Unearned Rent Revenue
EB12.

5.3 Using the following Balance Sheet summary information, calculate for the two years presented:

A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

348

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

EB13.

5.3 Using the following account balances, calculate for the two years presented:

A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

EB14.

5.3 Using the following Balance Sheet summary information, calculate for the two companies

presented:
A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

Then:
A.

evaluate which company’s liquidity position appears stronger, and why.

EB15.

5.3 From the following Company B adjusted trial balance, prepare simple financial statements, as

follows:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

349

Problem Set A
PA1.

5.1 Identify whether each of the following accounts would be considered a permanent account (yes/

no) and which financial statement it would be reported on (Balance Sheet, Income Statement, or Retained
Earnings Statement).
A.

Accumulated Depreciation

B.

Buildings

C.

Depreciation Expense

D.

Equipment

E.

Fees Earned Revenue

F.

Insurance Expense

G.

Prepaid Insurance

H. Supplies Expense
I.
PA2.

Dividends
5.1 The following selected accounts and normal balances existed at year-end. Make the four journal

entries required to close the books:

PA3.

5.1 The following selected accounts and normal balances existed at year-end. Notice that expenses

exceed revenue in this period. Make the four journal entries required to close the books:

350

PA4.

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

5.1 Use the following Adjusted Trial Balance to prepare the four journal entries required to close the

books:

PA5.

5.1 Use the following Adjusted Trial Balance to prepare the four journal entries required to close the

books:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

PA6.

5.1 Use the following T-accounts to prepare the four journal entries required to close the books:

PA7.

5.1 Assume that the first two closing entries have been made and posted. Use the T-accounts

provided as follows to:
A.

complete the closing entries

B.

determine the ending balance in the Retained Earnings account

351

352

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

PA8.

5.1 Correct any obvious errors in the following closing entries by providing the four corrected closing

entries. Assume all accounts held normal account balances in the Adjusted Trial Balance.
A.

B.

C.

D.

PA9.

5.2 Assuming the following Adjusted Trial Balance, create the Post-Closing Trial Balance that would

result, after all closing journal entries were made and posted:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

PA10.

353

5.2 The following Post-Closing Trial Balance contains errors. Prepare a corrected Post-Closing Trial

Balance:

PA11.

5.2 Assuming the following Adjusted Trial Balance, recreate the Post-Closing Trial Balance that would

result after all closing journal entries were made and posted:

PA12.

5.3 Use the following Adjusted Trial Balance to prepare a classified Balance Sheet:

354

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

PA13.

5.3 Using the following Balance Sheet summary information, for the two years presented calculate:

A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

PA14.

5.3 Using the following Balance Sheet summary information, calculate for the two companies

presented:
A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

PA15.

5.3 Using the following account balances, calculate for the two years presented:

A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

PA16.

5.4 From the following Company R adjusted trial balance, prepare the following:

A.

Income Statement

B.

Retained Earnings Statement

C.

Balance Sheet (simple—unclassified)

D.

Closing journal entries

E.

Post-Closing Trial Balance

PA17.

5.4 From the following Company T adjusted trial balance, prepare the following:

A.

Income Statement

B.

Retained Earnings Statement

C.

Balance Sheet (simple—unclassified)

D.

Closing journal entries

E.

Post-Closing Trial Balance

355

356

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Problem Set B

B

PB1.

5.1 Identify whether each of the following accounts would be considered a permanent account (yes/

no) and which financial statement it would be reported on (Balance Sheet, Income Statement, or Retained
Earnings Statement).
A.

Common Stock

B.

Dividends

C.

Dividends Payable

D.

Equipment

E.

Income Tax Expense

F.

Income Tax Payable

G.

Service Revenue

H. Unearned Service Revenue
I.
PB2.

Net Income
5.1 The following selected accounts and normal balances existed at year-end. Make the four journal

entries required to close the books:

PB3.

5.1 The following selected accounts and normal balances existed at year-end. Notice that expenses

exceed revenue in this period. Make the four journal entries required to close the books:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

PB4.

357

5.1 Use the following Adjusted Trial Balance to prepare the four journal entries required to close the

books:

PB5.
books:

5.1 Use the following Adjusted Trial Balance to prepare the four journal entries required to close the

358

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

PB6.

5.1 Use the following T-accounts to prepare the four journal entries required to close the books:

PB7.

5.1 Assume that the first two closing entries have been made and posted. Use the T-accounts

provided below to:
A.

complete the closing entries

B.

determine the ending balance in the Retained Earnings account

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

PB8.

5.1 Correct any obvious errors in the following closing entries by providing the four corrected closing

entries. Assume all accounts held normal account balances in the Adjusted Trial Balance.
A.

B.

C.

D.

PB9.

359

5.2 Assuming the following Adjusted Trial Balance, create the Post-Closing Trial Balance that would

result after all closing journal entries were made and posted:

360

PB10.

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

5.2 The following Post-Closing Trial Balance contains errors. Prepare a corrected Post-Closing Trial

Balance:

PB11.

5.2 Assuming the following Adjusted Trial Balance, re-create the Post-Closing Trial Balance that

would result after all closing journal entries were made and posted:

PB12.

5.3 Use the following Adjusted Trial Balance to prepare a classified Balance Sheet:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

PB13.

5.3 Using the following Balance Sheet summary information, calculate for the two years presented:

A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

PB14.

5.3 Using the following Balance Sheet summary information, calculate for the two years presented:

A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

PB15.

5.3 Using the following account balances, calculate for the two years presented:

A.

working capital

B.

current ratio

PB16.

361

5.4 From the following Company S adjusted trial balance, prepare the following:

A.

Income Statement

B.

Retained Earnings Statement

C.

Balance Sheet (simple—unclassified)

D.

Closing journal entries

E.

Post-Closing Trial Balance

362

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

Thought Provokers
TP1.

5.1 Assume you are the controller of a large corporation, and the chief executive officer (CEO) has

requested that you refrain from posting closing entries at 20X1 year-end, with the intention of combining the
two years’ profits in year 20X2, in an effort to make that year’s profits appear stronger.
Write a memo to the CEO, to offer your response to the request to skip the closing entries for year 20X1.
TP2.

5.1 Search the Securities and Exchange Commission website (https://www.sec.gov/edgar/

searchedgar/companysearch.html) and locate the latest Form 10-K for a company you would like to analyze.
Submit a short memo:
• State the name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen.
• Review the company’s end-of-period Balance Sheet, Income Statement, and Statement of Retained
Earnings.
• Use the information in these financial statements to answer these questions:
A.

If the company had used the income summary account for its closing entries, how much would
the company have credited the Income Summary account in the first closing entry?

B.

How much would the company have debited the Income Summary account in the second
closing entry?

Provide the web link to the company’s Form 10-K, to allow accurate verification of your answers.
TP3.

5.1 Assume you are a senior accountant and have been assigned the responsibility for making the

entries to close the books for the year. You have prepared the following four entries and presented them to
your boss, the chief financial officer of the company, along with the company CEO, in the weekly staff meeting:

As the CEO was reviewing your work, he asked the question, “What do these entries mean? Can we learn
anything about the company from reviewing them?”
Provide an explanation to give to the CEO about what the entries reveal about the company’s operations this
year.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

TP4.

363

5.2 Search the US Securities and Exchange Commission website (https://www.sec.gov/edgar/

searchedgar/companysearch.html) and locate the latest Form 10-K for a company you would like to analyze.
Submit a short memo:
• State the name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen.
• Review the company’s Balance Sheets.
• Reconstruct a Post-Closing Trial Balance for the company from the information presented in the
financial statements.
Provide the web link to the company’s Form 10-K, to allow accurate verification of your answers.
TP5.

5.3 Search the Securities and Exchange Commission website (https://www.sec.gov/edgar/

searchedgar/companysearch.html) and locate the latest Form 10-K for a company you would like to analyze.
Submit a short memo:
• State the name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen.
• Review the company’s end-of-period Balance Sheet for the most recent annual report.
• List the amount of Current Assets and Current Liabilities for the currently reported year, and for the
previous year. Use these amounts to calculate the company’s (A) working capital and (B) current ratio.
Provide the web link to the company’s Form 10-K, to allow accurate verification of your answers.

364

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 5 Completing the Accounting Cycle

6

Merchandising Transactions
Figure 6.1 J&J Games. Proper recognition of merchandising transactions gives management a clear inventory
picture to make informed business decisions. (credit: modification of “Video game retail store, consumerism at
its finest” by Bas de Reuver/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline
6.1 Compare and Contrast Merchandising versus Service Activities and Transactions
6.2 Compare and Contrast Perpetual versus Periodic Inventory Systems
6.3 Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise Purchases Using the Perpetual Inventory System
6.4 Analyze and Record Transactions for the Sale of Merchandise Using the Perpetual Inventory System
6.5 Discuss and Record Transactions Applying the Two Commonly Used Freight-In Methods
6.6 Describe and Prepare Multi-Step and Simple Income Statements for Merchandising Companies
6.7 Appendix: Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise Purchases and Sales Using the Periodic
Inventory System

Why It Matters
Jason and his brother James own a small business called J&J Games, specializing in the sale of video games and
accessories. They purchase their merchandise from a Marcus Electronics manufacturer and sell directly to
consumers.
When J&J Games (J&J) purchases merchandise from Marcus, they establish a contract detailing purchase costs,
payment terms, and shipping charges. It is important to establish this contract so that J&J and Marcus
understand the inventory responsibilities of each party. J&J Games typically does not pay with cash
immediately and is given an option for delayed payment with the possibility of a discount for early payment.
The delayed payment helps continue the strong relationship between the two parties, but the option for early

366

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

payment gives J&J a monetary incentive to pay early and allow Marcus to use the funds for other business
purposes. Until J&J pays on their account, this outstanding balance remains a liability for J&J.
J&J Games successfully sells merchandise on a regular basis to customers. As the business grows, the company
later considers selling gaming accessories in bulk orders to other businesses. While these bulk sales will
provide a new growth opportunity for J&J, the company understands that these clients may need time to pay
for their orders. This can create a dilemma; J&J Games needs to offer competitive incentives for these clients
while also maintaining the ability to pay their own obligations. They will carefully consider sales discounts,
returns, and allowance policies that do not overextend their company’s financial position while giving them an
opportunity to create lasting relationships with a new customer base.
6.1

Compare and Contrast Merchandising versus Service Activities and

Transactions
Every week, you run errands for your household. These errands may include buying products and services
from local retailers, such as gas, groceries, and clothing. As a consumer, you are focused solely on purchasing
your items and getting home to your family. You are probably not thinking about how your purchases impact
the businesses you frequent. Whether the business is a service or a merchandising company, it tracks sales
from customers, purchases from manufacturers or other suppliers, and costs that affect their everyday
operations. There are some key differences between these business types in the manner and detail required
for transaction recognition.

Comparison of Merchandising Transactions versus Service Transactions
Some of the biggest differences between a service company and a merchandising company are what they sell,
their typical financial transactions, their operating cycles, and how these translate to financial statements.
A service company provides intangible services to customers and does not have inventory. Some examples of
service companies include lawyers, doctors, consultants, and accountants. Service companies often have
simple financial transactions that involve taking customer deposits, billing clients after services have been
provided, providing the service, and processing payments. These activities may occur frequently within a
company’s accounting cycle and make up a portion of the service company’s operating cycle.
An operating cycle is the amount of time it takes a company to use its cash to provide a product or service
and collect payment from the customer. Completing this cycle faster puts the company in a more stable
financial position. A typical operating cycle for a service company begins with having cash available, providing
service to a customer, and then receiving cash from the customer for the service (Figure 6.2).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Figure 6.2

367

Typical Operating Cycle for a Service Firm. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The income statement format is fairly simple as well (see Figure 6.3). Revenues (sales) are reported first,
followed by any period operating expenses. The outcome of sales less expenses, which is net income (loss), is
calculated from these accounts.

Figure 6.3

Service Company Income Statement. Expenses are subtracted directly from Sales to produce net

income (loss). (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
A merchandising company resells finished goods (inventory) produced by a manufacturer (supplier) to
customers. Some examples of merchandising companies include Walmart, Macy’s, and Home Depot.
Merchandising companies have financial transactions that include: purchasing merchandise, paying for
merchandise, storing inventory, selling merchandise, and collecting customer payments. A typical operating
cycle for a merchandising company starts with having cash available, purchasing inventory, selling the
merchandise to customers, and finally collecting payment from customers (Figure 6.4).

368

Figure 6.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Typical Operating Cycle for a Merchandising Company. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Their income statement format is a bit more complicated than for a service company and is discussed in
greater detail in Describe and Prepare Multi-Step and Simple Income Statements for Merchandising
Companies. Note that unlike a service company, the merchandiser, also sometimes labeled as a retailer, must
first resolve any sale reductions and merchandise costs, known as Cost of Goods Sold, before determining
other expenses and net income (loss). A simple retailer income statement is shown in Figure 6.5 for
comparison.

Figure 6.5

Merchandise Company Income Statement. Cost of Goods Sold is deducted from net sales to

calculate gross margin. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Characteristics of Merchandising Transactions
Merchandising transactions are separated into two categories: purchases and sales. In general, a purchase
transaction occurs between a manufacturer and the merchandiser, also called a retailer. A sales transaction
occurs between a customer and the merchandiser or retailer. We will now discuss the characteristics that
create purchase and sales transactions for a retailer. A merchandiser will need to purchase merchandise for its
business to continue operations and can use several purchase situations to accomplish this.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

369

Purchases with Cash or on Credit
A retailer typically conducts business with a manufacturer or with a supplier who buys from a manufacturer.
The retailer will purchase their finished goods for resale. When the purchase occurs, the retailer may pay for
the merchandise with cash or on credit. If the retailer pays for the merchandise with cash, they would be
trading one current asset, Cash, for another current asset, Merchandise Inventory or just Inventory,
depending upon the company’s account titles. In this example, they would record a debit entry to
Merchandise Inventory and a credit entry to Cash. If they decide to pay on credit, a liability would be created,
and Accounts Payable would be credited rather than Cash. For example, a clothing store may pay a jeans
manufacturer cash for 50 pairs of jeans, costing $25 each. The following entry would occur.

If this same company decides to purchase merchandise on credit, Accounts Payable is credited instead of
Cash.

Merchandise Inventory is a current asset account that houses all purchase costs associated with the
transaction. This includes the cost of the merchandise, shipping charges, insurance fees, taxes, and any other
costs that gets the products ready for sale. Gross purchases are defined as the original amount of the
purchase without considering reductions for purchase discounts, returns, or allowances. Once the purchase
reductions are adjusted at the end of a period, net purchases are calculated. Net purchases (see Figure 6.6)
equals gross purchases less purchase discounts, purchase returns, and purchase allowances.

Figure 6.6

Purchase Transactions’ Effects on Gross Purchases. Deducting purchase discounts, returns, and

allowances from gross purchases will result in net purchases. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Purchase Discounts
If a retailer, pays on credit, they will work out payment terms with the manufacturer. These payment terms
establish the purchase cost, an invoice date, any discounts, shipping charges, and the final payment due date.
Purchase discounts provide an incentive for the retailer to pay early on their accounts by offering a reduced

370

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

rate on the final purchase cost. Receiving payment in a timely manner allows the manufacturer to free up cash
for other business opportunities and decreases the risk of nonpayment.
To describe the discount terms, the manufacturer can write descriptions such as 2/10, n/30 on the invoice. The
“2” represents a discount rate of 2%, the “10” represents the discount period in days, and the “n/30” means
“net of 30” days, representing the entire payment period without a discount application. So, “2/10, n/30” reads
as, “The company will receive a 2% discount on their purchase if they pay in 10 days. Otherwise, they have 30
days from the date of the sale to pay in full, no discount received.” In some cases, if the retailer exceeds the
full payment period (30 days in this example), the manufacturer may charge interest as a penalty for late
payment. The number of days allowed for both the discount period and the full payment period begins
counting from the invoice date.
If a merchandiser pays an invoice within the discount period, they receive a discount, which affects the cost of
the inventory. Let’s say a retailer pays within the discount window. They would need to show a credit to the
Merchandise Inventory account, recognizing the decreased final cost of the merchandise. This aligns with the
cost principle, which requires a company to record an asset’s value at the cost of acquisition. In addition, since
cash is used to pay the manufacturer, Cash is credited. The debit to Accounts Payable does not reflect the
discount taken: it reflects fulfillment of the liability in full, and the credits to Merchandise Inventory and Cash
reflect the discount taken, as demonstrated in the following example.
If the retailer does not pay within the discount window, they do not receive a discount but are still required to
pay the full invoice price at the end of the term. In this case, Accounts Payable is debited and Cash is credited,
but no reductions are made to Merchandise Inventory.
For example, suppose a kitchen appliances retailer purchases merchandise for their store from a
manufacturer on September 1 in the amount of $1,600. Credit terms are 2/10, n/30 from the invoice date of
September 1. The retailer makes payment on September 5 and receives the discount. The following entry
occurs.

Let’s consider the same situation except the retailer did not make the discount window and paid in full on
September 30. The entry would recognize the following instead.

There are two kinds of purchase discounts, cash discounts and trade discounts. Cash discount provides a
discount on the final price after purchase if a retailer pays within a discount window. On the other hand, a
trade discount is a reduction to the advertised manufacturer’s price that occurs during negotiations of a final
purchase price before the inventory is purchased. The trade discount may become larger if the retailer
purchases more in one transaction. While the cash discount is recognized in journal entries, a trade discount is

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

371

not, since it is negotiated before purchase.
For example, assume that a retailer is considering an order for $4,000 in inventory on September 1. The
manufacturer offers the retailer a 15% discount on the price if they place the order by September 5. Assume
that the retailer places the $4,000 order on September 3. The purchase price would be $4,000 less the 15%
discount of $600, or $3,400. Since the trade discount is based on when the order was placed and not on any
potential payment discounts, the initial journal entry to record the purchase would reflect the discounted
amount of $3,400. Even if the retailer receives a trade discount, they may still be eligible for an additional
purchase discount if they pay within the discount window of the invoice.

Purchase Returns and Allowances
If a retailer is unhappy with their purchase—for example, if the order is incorrect or if the products are
damaged—they may receive a partial or full refund from the manufacturer in a purchase returns and
allowances transaction. A purchase return occurs when merchandise is returned and a full refund is issued. A
purchase allowance occurs when merchandise is kept and a partial refund is issued. In either case, a
manufacturer will issue a debit memo to acknowledge the change in contract terms and the reduction in the
amount owed.
To recognize a return or allowance, the retailer will reduce Accounts Payable (or increase Cash) and reduce
Merchandise Inventory. Accounts Payable decreases if the retailer has yet to pay on their account, and Cash
increases if they had already paid and received a subsequent refund. Merchandise Inventory decreases to
show the reduction of inventory cost from the retailer’s inventory stock. Note that if a retailer receives a
refund before they make a payment, any discount taken must be from the new cost of the merchandise less
the refund.
To illustrate, assume that Carter Candle Company received a shipment from a manufacturer that had 150
candles that cost $150. Assume that they have not yet paid for these candles and 100 of the candles are badly
damaged and must be returned. The other 50 candles are marketable, but are not the right style. The candle
company returned the 100 defective candles for a full refund and requested and received an allowance of $20
for the 50 improper candles they kept. The first entry shows the return and the second entry shows the
allowance.

It is possible to show these entries as one, since they affect the same accounts and were requested at the
same time. From a manager’s standpoint, though, it may be better to record these as separate transactions to

372

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

better understand the specific reasons for the reduction to inventory (either return or allowance) and
restocking needs.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Internal Controls over Merchandise Returns[1]
Returning merchandise requires more than an accountant making journal entries or a clerk restocking
items in a warehouse or store. An ethical accountant understands that there must be internal controls
governing the return of items. As used in accounting, the term “internal control” describes the
methodology of implementing accounting and operational checkpoints in a system to ensure compliance
with sound business and operational practices while permitting the proper recording of accounting
information. All transactions require both operational and accounting actions to ensure that the amounts
have been recorded in the accounting records and that operational requirements have been met.
Merchandise return controls require that there be a separation of duties between the employee
approving the return and the person recording the return of merchandise in the accounting records.
Basically, the person performing the return should not be the person recording the event in the
accounting records. This is called separation of duties and is just one example of an internal control that
should be used when merchandise is returned.
Every company faces different challenges with returns, but one of the most common challenges includes
fake or fictitious returns. The use of internal controls is a protective action the company undertakes, with
the assistance of professional accountants, to ensure that fictitious returns do not occur. The internal
controls may include prescribed actions of employees, special tags on merchandise, specific store layouts
that ensure customers pass checkout points before leaving the store, cameras to record activity in the
facility, and other activities and internal controls that go beyond accounting and journal entries to ensure
that assets of a company are protected.

Characteristics of Sales Transactions
Business owners may encounter several sales situations that can help meet customer needs and control
inventory operations. For example, some customers will expect the opportunity to buy using short-term credit
and often will assume that they will receive a discount for paying within a brief period. The mechanics of sales
discounts are demonstrated later in this section.
Sales with Cash or on Credit
As previously mentioned, a sale is usually considered a transaction between a merchandiser or retailer and a
customer. When a sale occurs, a customer has the option to pay with cash or credit. For our purposes, let’s
consider “credit” as credit extended from the business directly to the customer.
Whether or not a customer pays with cash or credit, a business must record two accounting entries. One entry
recognizes the sale and the other recognizes the cost of the sale. The sales entry consists of a debit to either

1 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). Internal Control—Integrated Framework. May 2013. https://na.theiia.org/standardsguidance/topics/Documents/Executive_Summary.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

373

Cash or Accounts Receivable (if paying on credit), and a credit to the revenue account, Sales.
The amount recorded in the Sales account is the gross amount. Gross sales is the original amount of the sale
without factoring in any possible reductions for discounts, returns, or allowances. Once those reductions are
recorded at the end of a period, net sales are calculated. Net sales (see Figure 6.7) equals gross sales less
sales discounts, sales returns, and sales allowances. Recording the sale as it occurs allows the company to
align with the revenue recognition principle. The revenue recognition principle requires companies to record
revenue when it is earned, and revenue is earned when a product or service has been provided.

Figure 6.7

Sales Transactions’ Effect on Gross Sales. Deducting sales discounts, returns, and allowances

from gross sales, will result in net sales. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA
4.0 license)
The second accounting entry that is made during a sale describes the cost of sales. The cost of sales entry
includes decreasing Merchandise Inventory and increasing Cost of Goods Sold (COGS). The decrease to
Merchandise Inventory reflects the reduction in the inventory account value due to the sold merchandise. The
increase to COGS represents the expense associated with the sale. The cost of goods sold (COGS) is an
expense account that houses all costs associated with getting the product ready for sale. This could include
purchase costs, shipping, taxes, insurance, stocking fees, and overhead related to preparing the product for
sale. By recording the cost of sale when the sale occurs, the company aligns with the matching principle. The
matching principle requires companies to match revenues generated with related expenses in the period in
which they are incurred.
For example, when a shoe store sells 150 pairs of athletic cleats to a local baseball league for $1,500 (cost of
$900), the league may pay with cash or credit. If the baseball league elects to pay with cash, the shoe store
would debit Cash as part of the sales entry. If the baseball league decides to use a line of credit extended by
the shoe store, the shoe store would debit Accounts Receivable as part of the sales entry instead of Cash. With
the sales entry, the shoe store must also recognize the $900 cost of the shoes sold and the $900 reduction in
Merchandise Inventory.

You may have noticed that sales tax has not been discussed as part of the sales entry. Sales taxes are liabilities

374

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

that require a portion of every sales dollar be remitted to a government entity. This would reduce the amount
of cash the company keeps after the sale. Sales tax is relevant to consumer sales and is discussed in detail in
Current Liabilities.
There are a few transactional situations that may occur after a sale is made that have an effect on reported
sales at the end of a period.
Sales Discounts
Sales discounts are incentives given to customers to entice them to pay off their accounts early. Why would a
retailer offer this? Wouldn’t they rather receive the entire amount owed? The discount serves several purposes
that are similar to the rationale manufacturers consider when offering discounts to retailers. It can help
solidify a long-term relationship with the customer, encourage the customer to purchase more, and decreases
the time it takes for the company to see a liquid asset (cash). Cash can be used for other purposes
immediately such as reinvesting in the business, paying down loans quicker, and distributing dividends to
shareholders. This can help grow the business at a more rapid rate.
Similar to credit terms between a retailer and a manufacturer, a customer could see credit terms offered by
the retailer in the form of 2/10, n/30. This particular example shows that if a customer pays their account
within 10 days, they will receive a 2% discount. Otherwise, they have 30 days to pay in full but do not receive a
discount. If the customer does not pay within the discount window, but pays within 30 days, the retailing
company records a credit to Accounts Receivable, and a debit to Cash for the full amount stated on the invoice.
If the customer is able to pay the account within the discount window, the company records a credit to
Accounts Receivable, a debit to Cash, and a debit to Sales Discounts.
The sales discounts account is a contra revenue account that is deducted from gross sales at the end of a
period in the calculation of net sales. Sales Discounts has a normal debit balance, which offsets Sales that has
a normal credit balance.
Let’s assume that a customer purchased 10 emergency kits from a retailer at $100 per kit on credit. The
retailer offered the customer 2/10, n/30 terms, and the customer paid within the discount window. The retailer
recorded the following entry for the initial sale.

Since the retail doesn’t know at the point of sale whether or not the customer will qualify for the sales
discount, the entire account receivable of $1,000 is recorded on the retailer’s journal.
Also assume that the retail’s costs of goods sold in this example were $560 and we are using the perpetual
inventory method. The journal entry to record the sale of the inventory follows the entry for the sale to the
customer.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

375

Since the customer paid the account in full within the discount qualification period of ten days, the following
journal entry on the retailer’s books reflects the payment.

Now, assume that the customer paid the retailer within the 30-day period but did not qualify for the discount.
The following entry reflects the payment without the discount.

Please note that the entire $1,000 account receivable created is eliminated under both payment options. When
the discount is missed, the retail received the entire $1,000. However, when the discount was received by the
customer, the retailer received $980, and the remaining $20 is recorded in the sales discount account.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Ethical Discounts
Should employees or companies provide discounts to employees of other organizations? An
accountant’s employing organization usually has a code of ethics or conduct that addresses policies for
employee discounts. While many companies offer their employees discounts as a benefit, some
companies also offer discounts or free products to non-employees who work for governmental
organizations. Accountants may need to work in situations where other entities’ codes of ethics/conduct
do not permit employees to accept discounts or free merchandise. What should the accountant’s
company do when an outside organization’s code of ethics and conduct does not permit its employees to
accept discounts or free merchandise?
The long-term benefits of discounts are contrasted with organizational codes of ethics and conduct that
limit others from accepting discounts from your organization. The International Association of Chiefs of
Police’s Law Enforcement Code of Ethics limits the ability of police officers to accept discounts.

[2]

These

376

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

discounts may be as simple as a free cup of coffee, other gifts, rewards points, and hospitality points or
discounts for employees or family members of the governmental organization’s employees. Providing
discounts may create ethical dilemmas. The ethical dilemma may not arise from the accountant’s
employer, but from the employer of the person outside the organization receiving the discount.
The World Customs Organization’s Model Code of Ethics and Conduct states that “customs employees are
called upon to use their best judgment to avoid situations of real or perceived conflict. In doing so, they
should consider the following criteria on gifts, hospitality and other benefits, bearing in mind the full
context of this Code. Public servants shall not accept or solicit any gifts, hospitality or other benefits that
may have a real or apparent influence on their objectivity in carrying out their official duties or that may
place them under obligation to the donor.”

[3]

At issue is that the employee of the outside organization is placed in a conflict between their personal
interests and the interest of their employer. The accountant’s employer’s discount has created this
conflict. In these situations, it is best for the accountant’s employer to respect the other organization’s
code of conduct. As well, it might be illegal for the accountant’s employer to provide discounts to a
governmental organization’s employees. The professional accountant should always be aware of the
discount policy of any outside company prior to providing discounts to the employees of other
companies or organizations.

Sales Returns and Allowances
If a customer purchases merchandise and is dissatisfied with their purchase, they may receive a refund or a
partial refund, depending on the situation. When the customer returns merchandise and receives a full refund,
it is considered a sales return. When the customer keeps the defective merchandise and is given a partial
refund, it is considered a sales allowance. The biggest difference is that a customer returns merchandise in a
sales return and keeps the merchandise in a sales allowance.
When a customer returns the merchandise, a retailer issues a credit memo to acknowledge the change in
contract and reduction to Accounts Receivable, if applicable. The retailer records an entry acknowledging the
return by reducing either Cash or Accounts Receivable and increasing Sales Returns and Allowances. Cash
would decrease if the customer had already paid for the merchandise and cash was thus refunded to the
customer. Accounts Receivable would decrease if the customer had not yet paid on their account. Like Sales
Discounts, the sales returns and allowances account is a contra revenue account with a normal debit balance
that reduces the gross sales figure at the end of the period.
Beyond recording the return, the retailer must also determine if the returned merchandise is in “sellable
condition.” An item is in sellable condition if the merchandise is good enough to warrant a sale to another
customer in the future. If so, the company would record a decrease to Cost of Goods Sold (COGS) and an
increase to Merchandise Inventory to return the merchandise back to the inventory for resale. This is recorded
at the merchandise’s costs of goods sold value. If the merchandise is in sellable condition but will not realize
the original cost of the good, the company must estimate the loss at this time.

2 International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP). Law Enforcement Code of Ethics. October, 1957. https://www.theiacp.org/resources/lawenforcement-code-of-ethics
3 World Customs Organization. Model Code of Ethics and Conduct. n.d. http://www.wcoomd.org/~/media/wco/public/global/pdf/topics/
integrity/instruments-and-tools/model-code-of-ethics-and-conduct.pdf?la=en

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

377

On the other hand, when the merchandise is returned and is not in sellable condition, the retailer must
estimate the value of the merchandise in its current condition and record a loss. This would increase
Merchandise Inventory for the assessed value of the merchandise in its current state, decrease COGS for the
original expense amount associated with the sale, and increase Loss on Defective Merchandise for the
unsellable merchandise lost value.

Let’s say a customer purchases 300 plants on credit from a nursery for $3,000 (with a cost of $1,200). The first
entry reflects the initial sale by the nursery. The second entry reflects the cost of goods sold.

Upon receipt, the customer discovers the plants have been infested with bugs and they send all the plants
back. Assuming that the customer had not yet paid the nursery any of the $3,000 accounts receivable and
assuming that the nursery determines the condition of the returned plants to be sellable, the retailer would
record the following entries.

For another example, let’s say the plant customer was only dissatisfied with 100 of the plants. After speaking
with the nursery, the customer decides to keep 200 of the plants for a partial refund of $1,000. The nursery
would record the following entry for sales allowance associated with 100 plants.

378

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

The nursery would also record a corresponding entry for the inventory and the cost of goods sold for the 100
returned plants.

For both the return and the allowance, if the customer had already paid their account in full, Cash would be
affected rather than Accounts Receivable.
There are differing opinions as to whether sales returns and allowances should be in separate accounts.
Separating the accounts would help a retailer distinguish between items that are returned and those that the
customer kept. This can better identify quality control issues, track whether a customer was satisfied with their
purchase, and report how many resources are spent on processing returns. Most companies choose to
combine returns and allowances into one account, but from a manager’s perspective, it may be easier to have
the accounts separated to make current determinations about inventory.
You may have noticed our discussion of credit sales did not include third-party credit card transactions. This is
when a customer pays with a credit or debit card from a third-party, such as Visa, MasterCard, Discover, or
American Express. These entries and discussion are covered in more advanced accounting courses. A more
comprehensive example of merchandising purchase and sale transactions occurs in Calculate Activity-Based
Product Costs (http://cnx.org/content/m68137/latest/) and Compare and Contrast Traditional and ActivityBased Costing Systems (http://cnx.org/content/m68138/latest/) , applying the perpetual inventory method.

LINK TO LEARNING
Major retailers must find new ways to manage inventory and reduce operating cycles to stay competitive.
Companies such as Amazon.com Inc., have been able to reduce their operating cycles and increase their
receivable collection rates to a level better than many of their nearest competitors. Check out Stock
Analysis on Net (https://openstax.org/l/50StockAnalyNet) to find out how they do this and to see a
comparison of operating cycles for top retail brands.

6.2

Compare and Contrast Perpetual versus Periodic Inventory Systems

There are two ways in which a company may account for their inventory. They can use a perpetual or periodic
inventory system. Let’s look at the characteristics of these two systems.

Characteristics of the Perpetual and Periodic Inventory Systems
A perpetual inventory system automatically updates and records the inventory account every time a sale, or
purchase of inventory occurs. You can consider this “recording as you go.” The recognition of each sale or

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

379

purchase happens immediately upon sale or purchase.
A periodic inventory system updates and records the inventory account at certain, scheduled times at the
end of an operating cycle. The update and recognition could occur at the end of the month, quarter, and year.
There is a gap between the sale or purchase of inventory and when the inventory activity is recognized.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) do not state a required inventory system, but the periodic
inventory system uses a Purchases account to meet the requirements for recognition under GAAP. IFRS
requirements are very similar. The main difference is that assets are valued at net realizable value and can be
increased or decreased as values change. Under GAAP, once values are reduced they cannot be increased
again.

Figure 6.8

Inventory Systems. (credit: “Untitled” by Marcin Wichary/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Merchandising Transactions
Gearhead Outfitters is a retailer of outdoor-related gear such as clothing, footwear, backpacks, and
camping equipment. Therefore, one of the biggest assets on Gearhead’s balance sheet is inventory. The
proper presentation of inventory in a company’s books leads to a number of accounting challenges, such
as:
• What method of accounting for inventory is appropriate?
• How often should inventory be counted?
• How will inventory in the books be valued?
• Is any of the inventory obsolete and, if so, how will it be accounted for?
• Is all inventory included in the books?
• Are items included as inventory in the books that should not be?
Proper application of accounting principles is vital to keep accurate books and records. In accounting for
inventory, matching principle, valuation, cutoff, completeness, and cost flow assumptions are all
important. Did Gearhead match the cost of sale with the sale itself? Was only inventory that belonged to
the company as of the period end date included? Did Gearhead count all the inventory? Perhaps some

380

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

goods were in transit (on a delivery truck for a sale just made, or en route to Gearhead). What is the
correct cost flow assumption for Gearhead to accurately account for inventory? Should it use a first-in,
first-out method, or last-in, first-out?
These are all accounting challenges Gearhead faces with respect to inventory. As inventory will represent
one of the largest items on the balance sheet, it is vital that Gearhead management take due care with
decisions related to inventory accounting. Keeping in mind considerations such as gross profit, inventory
turnover, meeting demand, point-of-sale systems, and timeliness of accounting information, what other
accounting challenges might arise regarding the company’s inventory accounting processes?

Inventory Systems Comparison
There are some key differences between perpetual and periodic inventory systems. When a company uses the
perpetual inventory system and makes a purchase, they will automatically update the Merchandise Inventory
account. Under a periodic inventory system, Purchases will be updated, while Merchandise Inventory will
remain unchanged until the company counts and verifies its inventory balance. This count and verification
typically occur at the end of the annual accounting period, which is often on December 31 of the year. The
Merchandise Inventory account balance is reported on the balance sheet while the Purchases account is
reported on the Income Statement when using the periodic inventory method. The Cost of Goods Sold is
reported on the Income Statement under the perpetual inventory method.

A purchase return or allowance under perpetual inventory systems updates Merchandise Inventory for any
decreased cost. Under periodic inventory systems, a temporary account, Purchase Returns and Allowances, is
updated. Purchase Returns and Allowances is a contra account and is used to reduce Purchases.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

381

When a purchase discount is applied under a perpetual inventory system, Merchandise Inventory decreases
for the discount amount. Under a periodic inventory system, Purchase Discounts (a temporary, contra
account), increases for the discount amount and Merchandise Inventory remains unchanged.

When a sale occurs under perpetual inventory systems, two entries are required: one to recognize the sale,
and the other to recognize the cost of sale. For the cost of sale, Merchandise Inventory and Cost of Goods Sold
are updated. Under periodic inventory systems, this cost of sale entry does not exist. The recognition of
merchandise cost only occurs at the end of the period when adjustments are made and temporary accounts
are closed.

When a sales return occurs, perpetual inventory systems require recognition of the inventory’s condition. This
means a decrease to COGS and an increase to Merchandise Inventory. Under periodic inventory systems, only
the sales return is recognized, but not the inventory condition entry.

382

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

A sales allowance and sales discount follow the same recording formats for either perpetual or periodic
inventory systems.

Adjusting and Closing Entries for a Perpetual Inventory System
You have already explored adjusting entries and the closing process in prior discussions, but merchandising
activities require additional adjusting and closing entries to inventory, sales discounts, returns, and
allowances. Here, we’ll briefly discuss these additional closing entries and adjustments as they relate to the
perpetual inventory system.
At the end of the period, a perpetual inventory system will have the Merchandise Inventory account up-todate; the only thing left to do is to compare a physical count of inventory to what is on the books. A physical
inventory count requires companies to do a manual “stock-check” of inventory to make sure what they have
recorded on the books matches what they physically have in stock. Differences could occur due to
mismanagement, shrinkage, damage, or outdated merchandise. Shrinkage is a term used when inventory or
other assets disappear without an identifiable reason, such as theft. For a perpetual inventory system, the
adjusting entry to show this difference follows. This example assumes that the merchandise inventory is
overstated in the accounting records and needs to be adjusted downward to reflect the actual value on hand.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

383

If a physical count determines that merchandise inventory is understated in the accounting records,
Merchandise Inventory would need to be increased with a debit entry and the COGS would be reduced with a
credit entry. The adjusting entry is:

To sum up the potential adjustment process, after the merchandise inventory has been verified with a physical
count, its book value is adjusted upward or downward to reflect the actual inventory on hand, with an
accompanying adjustment to the COGS.
Not only must an adjustment to Merchandise Inventory occur at the end of a period, but closure of temporary
merchandising accounts to prepare them for the next period is required. Temporary accounts requiring
closure are Sales, Sales Discounts, Sales Returns and Allowances, and Cost of Goods Sold. Sales will close with
the temporary credit balance accounts to Income Summary.

Sales Discounts, Sales Returns and Allowances, and Cost of Goods Sold will close with the temporary debit
balance accounts to Income Summary.

Note that for a periodic inventory system, the end of the period adjustments require an update to COGS. To
determine the value of Cost of Goods Sold, the business will have to look at the beginning inventory balance,
purchases, purchase returns and allowances, discounts, and the ending inventory balance.
The formula to compute COGS is:

where:

Once the COGS balance has been established, an adjustment is made to Merchandise Inventory and COGS,
and COGS is closed to prepare for the next period.
Table 6.1 summarizes the differences between the perpetual and periodic inventory systems.

384

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Perpetual and Periodic Transaction Comparison
Transaction
Purchase of

Perpetual Inventory System
Record cost to Inventory account

Inventory
Purchase Return

Periodic Inventory System
Record cost to Purchases
account

Record to update Inventory

or Allowance

Record to Purchase Returns and
Allowances

Purchase Discount

Record to update Inventory

Record to Purchase Discounts

Sale of

Record two entries: one for sale and one for cost

Record one entry for the sale

Merchandise

of sale

Sales Return

Record two entries: one for sales return, one for

Record one entry: sales return,

cost of inventory returned

cost not recognized

Sales Allowance

Same under both systems

Same under both systems

Sales Discount

Same under both systems

Same under both systems

Table 6.1 There are several differences in account recognition between the perpetual and periodic inventory
systems.
There are advantages and disadvantages to both the perpetual and periodic inventory systems.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Point-of-Sale Systems
Advancements in point-of-sale (POS) systems have simplified the once tedious task of inventory
management. POS systems connect with inventory management programs to make real-time data
available to help streamline business operations. The cost of inventory management decreases with this
connection tool, allowing all businesses to stay current with technology without “breaking the bank.”
One such POS system is Square. Square accepts many payment types and updates accounting records
every time a sale occurs through a cloud-based application. Square, Inc. has expanded their product
offerings to include Square for Retail POS. This enhanced product allows businesses to connect sales and
inventory costs immediately. A business can easily create purchase orders, develop reports for cost of
goods sold, manage inventory stock, and update discounts, returns, and allowances. With this
application, customers have payment flexibility, and businesses can make present decisions to positively
affect growth.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

385

Advantages and Disadvantages of the Perpetual Inventory System
The perpetual inventory system gives real-time updates and keeps a constant flow of inventory information
available for decision-makers. With advancements in point-of-sale technologies, inventory is updated
automatically and transferred into the company’s accounting system. This allows managers to make decisions
as it relates to inventory purchases, stocking, and sales. The information can be more robust, with exact
purchase costs, sales prices, and dates known. Although a periodic physical count of inventory is still required,
a perpetual inventory system may reduce the number of times physical counts are needed.
The biggest disadvantages of using the perpetual inventory systems arise from the resource constraints for
cost and time. It is costly to keep an automatic inventory system up-to-date. This may prohibit smaller or less
established companies from investing in the required technologies. The time commitment to train and retrain
staff to update inventory is considerable. In addition, since there are fewer physical counts of inventory, the
figures recorded in the system may be drastically different from inventory levels in the actual warehouse. A
company may not have correct inventory stock and could make financial decisions based on incorrect data.

Advantages and Disadvantages of the Periodic Inventory System
The periodic inventory system is often less expensive and time consuming than perpetual inventory systems.
This is because there is no constant maintenance of inventory records or training and retraining of employees
to upkeep the system. The complexity of the system makes it difficult to identify the cost justification
associated with the inventory function.
While both the periodic and perpetual inventory systems require a physical count of inventory, periodic
inventorying requires more physical counts to be conducted. This updates the inventory account more
frequently to record exact costs. Knowing the exact costs earlier in an accounting cycle can help a company
stay on budget and control costs.
However, the need for frequent physical counts of inventory can suspend business operations each time this is
done. There are more chances for shrinkage, damaged, or obsolete merchandise because inventory is not
constantly monitored. Since there is no constant monitoring, it may be more difficult to make in-the-moment
business decisions about inventory needs.
While each inventory system has its own advantages and disadvantages, the more popular system is the
perpetual inventory system. The ability to have real-time data to make decisions, the constant update to
inventory, and the integration to point-of-sale systems, outweigh the cost and time investments needed to
maintain the system. (While our main coverage focuses on recognition under the perpetual inventory system,
Appendix: Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise Purchases and Sales Using the Periodic Inventory
System discusses recognition under the periodic inventory system.)

THINK IT THROUGH
Comparing Inventory Systems
Your company uses a perpetual inventory system to control its operations. They only check inventory
once every six months. At the 6-month physical count, an employee notices several inventory items
missing and many damaged units. In the company records, it shows an inventory balance of $300,000.

386

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

The actual physical count values inventory at $200,000. This is a significant difference in valuation and
has jeopardized the future of the company. As a manager, how might you avoid this large discrepancy in
the future? Would a change in inventory systems benefit the company? Are you constrained by any
resources?

6.3

Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise Purchases Using the

Perpetual Inventory System
The following example transactions and subsequent journal entries for merchandise purchases are recognized
using a perpetual inventory system. The periodic inventory system recognition of these example transactions
and corresponding journal entries are shown in Appendix: Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise
Purchases and Sales Using the Periodic Inventory System.

Basic Analysis of Purchase Transaction Journal Entries
To better illustrate merchandising activities, let’s follow California Business Solutions (CBS), a retailer providing
electronic hardware packages to meet small business needs. Each electronics hardware package (see
Figure 6.9) contains a desktop computer, tablet computer, landline telephone, and a 4-in-1 desktop printer
with a printer, copier, scanner, and fax machine.

Figure 6.9

California Business Solutions. Providing businesses electronic hardware solutions. (credit:

modification of “Professionnal desk” by “reynermedia”/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
CBS purchases each electronic product from a manufacturer. The following are the per-item purchase prices
from the manufacturer.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

387

Cash and Credit Purchase Transaction Journal Entries
On April 1, CBS purchases 10 electronic hardware packages at a cost of $620 each. CBS has enough cash-onhand to pay immediately with cash. The following entry occurs.

Merchandise Inventory-Packages increases (debit) for 6,200 ($620 × 10), and Cash decreases (credit) because
the company paid with cash. It is important to distinguish each inventory item type to better track inventory
needs.
On April 7, CBS purchases 30 desktop computers on credit at a cost of $400 each. The credit terms are n/15
with an invoice date of April 7. The following entry occurs.

Merchandise Inventory is specific to desktop computers and is increased (debited) for the value of the
computers by $12,000 ($400 × 30). Since the computers were purchased on credit by CBS, Accounts Payable
increases (credit).
On April 17, CBS makes full payment on the amount due from the April 7 purchase. The following entry occurs.

Accounts Payable decreases (debit), and Cash decreases (credit) for the full amount owed. The credit terms
were n/15, which is net due in 15 days. No discount was offered with this transaction. Thus the full payment of
$12,000 occurs.

Purchase Discount Transaction Journal Entries
On May 1, CBS purchases 67 tablet computers at a cost of $60 each on credit. The payment terms are 5/10, n/

388

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

30, and the invoice is dated May 1. The following entry occurs.

Merchandise Inventory-Tablet Computers increases (debit) in the amount of $4,020 (67 × $60). Accounts
Payable also increases (credit) but the credit terms are a little different than the previous example. These
credit terms include a discount opportunity (5/10), meaning, CBS has 10 days from the invoice date to pay on
their account to receive a 5% discount on their purchase.
On May 10, CBS pays their account in full. The following entry occurs.

Accounts Payable decreases (debit) for the original amount owed of $4,020 before any discounts are taken.
Since CBS paid on May 10, they made the 10-day window and thus received a discount of 5%. Cash decreases
(credit) for the amount owed, less the discount. Merchandise Inventory-Tablet Computers decreases (credit)
for the amount of the discount ($4,020 × 5%). Merchandise Inventory decreases to align with the Cost
Principle, reporting the value of the merchandise at the reduced cost.
Let’s take the same example purchase with the same credit terms, but now CBS paid their account on May 25.
The following entry would occur instead.

Accounts Payable decreases (debit) and Cash decreases (credit) for $4,020. The company paid on their account
outside of the discount window but within the total allotted timeframe for payment. CBS does not receive a
discount in this case but does pay in full and on time.

Purchase Returns and Allowances Transaction Journal Entries
On June 1, CBS purchased 300 landline telephones with cash at a cost of $60 each. On June 3, CBS discovers
that 25 of the phones are the wrong color and returns the phones to the manufacturer for a full refund. The
following entries occur with the purchase and subsequent return.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

389

Both Merchandise Inventory-Phones increases (debit) and Cash decreases (credit) by $18,000 ($60 × 300).

Since CBS already paid in full for their purchase, a full cash refund is issued. This increases Cash (debit) and
decreases (credit) Merchandise Inventory-Phones because the merchandise has been returned to the
manufacturer or supplier.
On June 8, CBS discovers that 60 more phones from the June 1 purchase are slightly damaged. CBS decides to
keep the phones but receives a purchase allowance from the manufacturer of $8 per phone. The following
entry occurs for the allowance.

Since CBS already paid in full for their purchase, a cash refund of the allowance is issued in the amount of $480
(60 × $8). This increases Cash (debit) and decreases (credit) Merchandise Inventory-Phones because the
merchandise is less valuable than before the damage discovery.
CBS purchases 80 units of the 4-in-1 desktop printers at a cost of $100 each on July 1 on credit. Terms of the
purchase are 5/15, n/40, with an invoice date of July 1. On July 6, CBS discovers 15 of the printers are damaged
and returns them to the manufacturer for a full refund. The following entries show the purchase and
subsequent return.

Both Merchandise Inventory-Printers increases (debit) and Accounts Payable increases (credit) by $8,000 ($100
× 80).

390

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Both Accounts Payable decreases (debit) and Merchandise Inventory-Printers decreases (credit) by $1,500 (15
× $100). The purchase was on credit and the return occurred before payment, thus decreasing Accounts
Payable. Merchandise Inventory decreases due to the return of the merchandise back to the manufacturer.
On July 10, CBS discovers that 4 more printers from the July 1 purchase are slightly damaged but decides to
keep them, with the manufacturer issuing an allowance of $30 per printer. The following entry recognizes the
allowance.

Both Accounts Payable decreases (debit) and Merchandise Inventory-Printers decreases (credit) by $120 (4 ×
$30). The purchase was on credit and the allowance occurred before payment, thus decreasing Accounts
Payable. Merchandise Inventory decreases due to the loss in value of the merchandise.
On July 15, CBS pays their account in full, less purchase returns and allowances. The following payment entry
occurs.

Accounts Payable decreases (debit) for the amount owed, less the return of $1,500 and the allowance of $120
($8,000 – $1,500 – $120). Since CBS paid on July 15, they made the 15-day window, thus receiving a discount of
5%. Cash decreases (credit) for the amount owed, less the discount. Merchandise Inventory-Printers decreases
(credit) for the amount of the discount ($6,380 × 5%). Merchandise Inventory decreases to align with the Cost
Principle, reporting the value of the merchandise at the reduced cost.

Summary of Purchase Transaction Journal Entries
The chart in Figure 6.10 represents the journal entry requirements based on various merchandising purchase
transactions using the perpetual inventory system.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Figure 6.10

Purchase Transaction Journal Entries Using a Perpetual Inventory System. (attribution: Copyright

Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Note that Figure 6.10 considers an environment in which inventory physical counts and matching books
records align. This is not always the case given concerns with shrinkage (theft), damages, or obsolete
merchandise. In this circumstance, an adjustment is recorded to inventory to account for the differences
between the physical count and the amount represented on the books.

YOUR TURN
Recording a Retailer’s Purchase Transactions
Record the journal entries for the following purchase transactions of a retailer.
Dec. 3

Purchased $500 worth of inventory on credit with terms 2/10, n/30, and invoice dated
December 3.

Dec. 6

Returned $150 worth of damaged inventory to the manufacturer and received a full refund.

Dec. 9

Paid the account in full

Solution

391

392

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

LINK TO LEARNING
Bean Counter is a website that offers free, fun and interactive games, simulations, and quizzes about
accounting. You can “Fling the Teacher,” “Walk the Plank,” and play “Basketball” while learning the
fundamentals of accounting topics. Check out Bean Counter (https://openstax.org/l/50BeanCounter) to
see what you can learn.

6.4

Analyze and Record Transactions for the Sale of Merchandise Using the

Perpetual Inventory System
The following example transactions and subsequent journal entries for merchandise sales are recognized
using a perpetual inventory system. The periodic inventory system recognition of these example transactions
and corresponding journal entries are shown in Appendix: Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise
Purchases and Sales Using the Periodic Inventory System.

Basic Analysis of Sales Transaction Journal Entries
Let’s continue to follow California Business Solutions (CBS) and their sales of electronic hardware packages to
business customers. As previously stated, each package contains a desktop computer, tablet computer,
landline telephone, and a 4-in-1 printer. CBS sells each hardware package for $1,200. They offer their
customers the option of purchasing extra individual hardware items for every electronic hardware package
purchase. Figure 6.11 lists the products CBS sells to customers; the prices are per-package, and per unit.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Figure 6.11

393

CBS’s Product Line. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)

Cash and Credit Sales Transaction Journal Entries
On July 1, CBS sells 10 electronic hardware packages to a customer at a sales price of $1,200 each. The
customer pays immediately with cash. The following entries occur.

In the first entry, Cash increases (debit) and Sales increases (credit) for the selling price of the packages,
$12,000 ($1,200 × 10). In the second entry, the cost of the sale is recognized. COGS increases (debit) and
Merchandise Inventory-Packages decreases (credit) for the cost of the packages, $6,200 ($620 × 10).
On July 7, CBS sells 20 desktop computers to a customer on credit. The credit terms are n/15 with an invoice
date of July 7. The following entries occur.

Since the computers were purchased on credit by the customer, Accounts Receivable increases (debit) and
Sales increases (credit) for the selling price of the computers, $15,000 ($750 × 20). In the second entry,
Merchandise Inventory-Desktop Computers decreases (credit), and COGS increases (debit) for the cost of the
computers, $8,000 ($400 × 20).
On July 17, the customer makes full payment on the amount due from the July 7 sale. The following entry
occurs.

394

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) and Cash increases (debit) for the full amount owed. The credit terms
were n/15, which is net due in 15 days. No discount was offered with this transaction; thus the full payment of
$15,000 occurs.

Sales Discount Transaction Journal Entries
On August 1, a customer purchases 56 tablet computers on credit. The payment terms are 2/10, n/30, and the
invoice is dated August 1. The following entries occur.

In the first entry, both Accounts Receivable (debit) and Sales (credit) increase by $16,800 ($300 × 56). These
credit terms are a little different than the earlier example. These credit terms include a discount opportunity
(2/10), meaning the customer has 10 days from the invoice date to pay on their account to receive a 2%
discount on their purchase. In the second entry, COGS increases (debit) and Merchandise Inventory–Tablet
Computers decreases (credit) in the amount of $3,360 (56 × $60).
On August 10, the customer pays their account in full. The following entry occurs.

Since the customer paid on August 10, they made the 10-day window and received a discount of 2%. Cash
increases (debit) for the amount paid to CBS, less the discount. Sales Discounts increases (debit) for the
amount of the discount ($16,800 × 2%), and Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) for the original amount
owed, before discount. Sales Discounts will reduce Sales at the end of the period to produce net sales.
Let’s take the same example sale with the same credit terms, but now assume the customer paid their account
on August 25. The following entry occurs.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Cash increases (debit) and Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) by $16,800. The customer paid on their
account outside of the discount window but within the total allotted timeframe for payment. The customer
does not receive a discount in this case but does pay in full and on time.

YOUR TURN
Recording a Retailer’s Sales Transactions
Record the journal entries for the following sales transactions by a retailer.
Jan. 5

Sold $2,450 of merchandise on credit (cost of $1,000), with terms 2/10, n/30, and invoice
dated January 5.

Jan. 9

The customer returned $500 worth of slightly damaged merchandise to the retailer and
received a full refund. The retailer returned the merchandise to its inventory at a cost of
$130.

Jan. 14
Solution

Account paid in full.

395

396

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Sales Returns and Allowances Transaction Journal Entries
On September 1, CBS sold 250 landline telephones to a customer who paid with cash. On September 3, the
customer discovers that 40 of the phones are the wrong color and returns the phones to CBS in exchange for a
full refund. CBS determines that the returned merchandise can be resold and returns the merchandise to
inventory at its original cost. The following entries occur for the sale and subsequent return.

In the first entry on September 1, Cash increases (debit) and Sales increases (credit) by $37,500 (250 × $150),
the sales price of the phones. In the second entry, COGS increases (debit), and Merchandise Inventory-Phones
decreases (credit) by $15,000 (250 × $60), the cost of the sale.

Since the customer already paid in full for their purchase, a full cash refund is issued on September 3. This
increases Sales Returns and Allowances (debit) and decreases Cash (credit) by $6,000 (40 × $150). The second
entry on September 3 returns the phones back to inventory for CBS because they have determined the
merchandise is in sellable condition at its original cost. Merchandise Inventory–Phones increases (debit) and
COGS decreases (credit) by $2,400 (40 × $60).
On September 8, the customer discovers that 20 more phones from the September 1 purchase are slightly
damaged. The customer decides to keep the phones but receives a sales allowance from CBS of $10 per
phone. The following entry occurs for the allowance.

Since the customer already paid in full for their purchase, a cash refund of the allowance is issued in the
amount of $200 (20 × $10). This increases (debit) Sales Returns and Allowances and decreases (credit) Cash.
CBS does not have to consider the condition of the merchandise or return it to their inventory because the
customer keeps the merchandise.
A customer purchases 55 units of the 4-in-1 desktop printers on October 1 on credit. Terms of the sale are 10/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

397

15, n/40, with an invoice date of October 1. On October 6, the customer returned 10 of the printers to CBS for a
full refund. CBS returns the printers to their inventory at the original cost. The following entries show the sale
and subsequent return.

In the first entry on October 1, Accounts Receivable increases (debit) and Sales increases (credit) by $19,250
(55 × $350), the sales price of the printers. Accounts Receivable is used instead of Cash because the customer
purchased on credit. In the second entry, COGS increases (debit) and Merchandise Inventory–Printers
decreases (credit) by $5,500 (55 × $100), the cost of the sale.

The customer has not yet paid for their purchase as of October 6. Therefore, the return increases Sales
Returns and Allowances (debit) and decreases Accounts Receivable (credit) by $3,500 (10 × $350). The second
entry on October 6 returns the printers back to inventory for CBS because they have determined the
merchandise is in sellable condition at its original cost. Merchandise Inventory–Printers increases (debit) and
COGS decreases (credit) by $1,000 (10 × $100).
On October 10, the customer discovers that 5 printers from the October 1 purchase are slightly damaged, but
decides to keep them, and CBS issues an allowance of $60 per printer. The following entry recognizes the
allowance.

Sales Returns and Allowances increases (debit) and Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) by $300 (5 × $60). A
reduction to Accounts Receivable occurs because the customer has yet to pay their account on October 10.
CBS does not have to consider the condition of the merchandise or return it to their inventory because the
customer keeps the merchandise.
On October 15, the customer pays their account in full, less sales returns and allowances. The following
payment entry occurs.

398

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) for the original amount owed, less the return of $3,500 and the
allowance of $300 ($19,250 – $3,500 – $300). Since the customer paid on October 15, they made the 15-day
window, thus receiving a discount of 10%. Sales Discounts increases (debit) for the discount amount ($15,450 ×
10%). Cash increases (debit) for the amount owed to CBS, less the discount.

Summary of Sales Transaction Journal Entries
The chart in Figure 6.12 represents the journal entry requirements based on various merchandising sales
transactions.

Figure 6.12

Journal Entry Requirements for Merchandise Sales Transaction. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

YOUR TURN
Recording a Retailer’s Sales Transactions
Record the journal entries for the following sales transactions of a retailer.
May 10

Sold $8,600 of merchandise on credit (cost of $2,650), with terms 5/10, n/30, and invoice
dated May 10.

May 13

The customer returned $1,250 worth of slightly damaged merchandise to the retailer and
received a full refund. The retailer returned the merchandise to its inventory at a cost of
$380.

May 15

The customer discovered some merchandise were the wrong color and received an
allowance from the retailer of $230.

May 20
Solution

The customer paid the account in full, less the return and allowance.

399

400

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

6.5

Discuss and Record Transactions Applying the Two Commonly Used

Freight-In Methods
When you buy merchandise online, shipping charges are usually one of the negotiated terms of the sale. As a
consumer, anytime the business pays for shipping, it is welcomed. For businesses, shipping charges bring
both benefits and challenges, and the terms negotiated can have a significant impact on inventory operations.

Figure 6.13

Shipping Merchandise. (credit: “Guida Siebert Dairy Milk Delivery Truck tractor trailer!” by Mike

Mozart/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

IFRS CONNECTION
Shipping Term Effects
Companies applying US GAAP as well as those applying IFRS can choose either a perpetual or periodic
inventory system to track purchases and sales of inventory. While the tracking systems do not differ
between the two methods, they have differences in when sales transactions are reported. If goods are
shipped FOB shipping point, under IFRS, the total selling price of the item would be allocated between
the item sold (as sales revenue) and the shipping (as shipping revenue). Under US GAAP, the seller can
elect whether the shipping costs will be an additional component of revenue (separate performance
obligation) or whether they will be considered fulfillment costs (expensed at the time shipping as
shipping expense). In an FOB destination scenario, the shipping costs would be considered a fulfillment
activity and expensed as incurred rather than be treated as a part of revenue under both IFRS and US
GAAP.
Example
Wally’s Wagons sells and ships 20 deluxe model wagons to Sam’s Emporium for $5,000. Assume $400 of
the total costs represents the costs of shipping the wagons and consider these two scenarios: (1) the
wagons are shipped FOB shipping point or (2) the wagons are shipped FOB destination. If Wally’s is
applying IFRS, the $400 shipping is considered a separate performance obligation, or shipping revenue,
and the other $4,600 is considered sales revenue. Both revenues are recorded at the time of shipping
and the $400 shipping revenue is offset by a shipping expense. If Wally’s used US GAAP instead, they
would choose between using the same treatment as described under IFRS or considering the costs of
shipping to be costs of fulfilling the order and expense those costs at the time they are incurred. In this
latter case, Wally’s would record Sales Revenue of $5,000 at the time the wagons are shipped and $400 as

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

401

shipping expense at the time of shipping. Notice that in both cases, the total net revenues are the same
$4,600, but the distribution of those revenues is different, which impacts analyses of sales revenue versus
total revenues. What happens if the wagons are shipped FOB destination instead? Under both IFRS and
US GAAP, the $400 shipping would be treated as an order fulfillment cost and recorded as an expense at
the time the goods are shipped. Revenue of $5,000 would be recorded at the time the goods are received
by Sam’s emporium.
Financial Statement Presentation of Cost of Goods Sold
IFRS allows greater flexibility in the presentation of financial statements, including the income statement.
Under IFRS, expenses can be reported in the income statement either by nature (for example, rent,
salaries, depreciation) or by function (such as COGS or Selling and Administrative). US GAAP has no
specific requirements regarding the presentation of expenses, but the SEC requires that expenses be
reported by function. Therefore, it may be more challenging to compare merchandising costs (cost of
goods sold) across companies if one company’s income statement shows expenses by function and
another company shows them by nature.

The Basics of Freight-in Versus Freight-out Costs
Shipping is determined by contract terms between a buyer and seller. There are several key factors to consider
when determining who pays for shipping, and how it is recognized in merchandising transactions. The
establishment of a transfer point and ownership indicates who pays the shipping charges, who is responsible
for the merchandise, on whose balance sheet the assets would be recorded, and how to record the transaction
for the buyer and seller.
Ownership of inventory refers to which party owns the inventory at a particular point in time—the buyer or
the seller. One particularly important point in time is the point of transfer, when the responsibility for the
inventory transfers from the seller to the buyer. Establishing ownership of inventory is important to determine
who pays the shipping charges when the goods are in transit as well as the responsibility of each party when
the goods are in their possession. Goods in transit refers to the time in which the merchandise is transported
from the seller to the buyer (by way of delivery truck, for example). One party is responsible for the goods in
transit and the costs associated with transportation. Determining whether this responsibility lies with the
buyer or seller is critical to determining the reporting requirements of the retailer or merchandiser.
Freight-in refers to the shipping costs for which the buyer is responsible when receiving shipment from a
seller, such as delivery and insurance expenses. When the buyer is responsible for shipping costs, they
recognize this as part of the purchase cost. This means that the shipping costs stay with the inventory until it is
sold. The cost principle requires this expense to stay with the merchandise as it is part of getting the item
ready for sale from the buyer’s perspective. The shipping expenses are held in inventory until sold, which
means these costs are reported on the balance sheet in Merchandise Inventory. When the merchandise is
sold, the shipping charges are transferred with all other inventory costs to Cost of Goods Sold on the income
statement.
For example, California Business Solutions (CBS) may purchase computers from a manufacturer and part of
the agreement is that CBS (the buyer) pays the shipping costs of $1,000. CBS would record the following entry
to recognize freight-in.

402

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Merchandise Inventory increases (debit), and Cash decreases (credit), for the entire cost of the purchase,
including shipping, insurance, and taxes. On the balance sheet, the shipping charges would remain a part of
inventory.
Freight-out refers to the costs for which the seller is responsible when shipping to a buyer, such as delivery
and insurance expenses. When the seller is responsible for shipping costs, they recognize this as a delivery
expense. The delivery expense is specifically associated with selling and not daily operations; thus, delivery
expenses are typically recorded as a selling and administrative expense on the income statement in the
current period.
For example, CBS may sell electronics packages to a customer and agree to cover the $100 cost associated
with shipping and insurance. CBS would record the following entry to recognize freight-out.

Delivery Expense increases (debit) and Cash decreases (credit) for the shipping cost amount of $100. On the
income statement, this $100 delivery expense will be grouped with Selling and Administrative expenses.

LINK TO LEARNING
Shipping term agreements provide clarity for buyers and sellers with regards to inventory
responsibilities. Use the animation on FOB Shipping Point and FOB Destination (https://openstax.org/l/
50ShippingTerms) to learn more.

Discussion and Application of FOB Destination
As you’ve learned, the seller and buyer will establish terms of purchase that include the purchase price, taxes,
insurance, and shipping charges. So, who pays for shipping? On the purchase contract, shipping terms
establish who owns inventory in transit, the point of transfer, and who pays for shipping. The shipping terms
are known as “free on board,” or simply FOB. Some refer to FOB as the point of transfer, but really, it

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

403

incorporates more than simply the point at which responsibility transfers. There are two FOB considerations:
FOB Destination and FOB Shipping Point.
If FOB destination point is listed on the purchase contract, this means the seller pays the shipping charges
(freight-out). This also means goods in transit belong to, and are the responsibility of, the seller. The point of
transfer is when the goods reach the buyer’s place of business.
To illustrate, suppose CBS sells 30 landline telephones at $150 each on credit at a cost of $60 per phone. On
the sales contract, FOB Destination is listed as the shipping terms, and shipping charges amount to $120, paid
as cash directly to the delivery service. The following entries occur.

Accounts Receivable (debit) and Sales (credit) increases for the amount of the sale (30 × $150). Cost of Goods
Sold increases (debit) and Merchandise Inventory decreases (credit) for the cost of sale (30 × $60). Delivery
Expense increases (debit) and Cash decreases (credit) for the delivery charge of $120.

Discussion and Application of FOB Shipping Point
If FOB shipping point is listed on the purchase contract, this means the buyer pays the shipping charges
(freight-in). This also means goods in transit belong to, and are the responsibility of, the buyer. The point of
transfer is when the goods leave the seller’s place of business.
Suppose CBS buys 40 tablet computers at $60 each on credit. The purchase contract shipping terms list FOB
Shipping Point. The shipping charges amount to an extra $5 per tablet computer. All other taxes, fees, and
insurance are included in the purchase price of $60. The following entry occurs to recognize the purchase.

Merchandise Inventory increases (debit) and Accounts Payable increases (credit) by the amount of the
purchase, including all shipping, insurance, taxes, and fees [(40 × $60) + (40 × $5)].
Figure 6.14 shows a comparison of shipping terms.

404

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Figure 6.14

FOB Shipping Point versus FOB Destination. A comparison of shipping terms. (attribution:

Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

THINK IT THROUGH
Choosing Suitable Shipping Terms
You are a seller and conduct business with several customers who purchase your goods on credit. Your
standard contract requires an FOB Shipping Point term, leaving the buyer with the responsibility for
goods in transit and shipping charges. One of your long-term customers asks if you can change the
terms to FOB Destination to help them save money.
Do you change the terms, why or why not? What positive and negative implications could this have for
your business, and your customer? What, if any, restrictions might you consider if you did change the
terms?

6.6

Describe and Prepare Multi-Step and Simple Income Statements for

Merchandising Companies
Merchandising companies prepare financial statements at the end of a period that include the income
statement, balance sheet, statement of cash flows, and statement of retained earnings. The presentation
format for many of these statements is left up to the business. For the income statement, this means a
company could prepare the statement using a multi-step format or a simple format (also known as a singlestep format). Companies must decide the format that best fits their needs.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Figure 6.15

405

Multi-Step versus Single-Step Formats. (credit: modification of “Balance Swing Equality” by

“Mediamodifier”/Pixabay, CC0)

Similarities and Differences between the Multi-Step and Simple Income Statement
Format
A multi-step income statement is more detailed than a simple income statement. Because of the additional
detail, it is the option selected by many companies whose operations are more complex. Each revenue and
expense account is listed individually under the appropriate category on the statement. The multi-step
statement separates cost of goods sold from operating expenses and deducts cost of goods sold from net
sales to obtain a gross margin.
Operating expenses are daily operational costs not associated with the direct selling of products or services.
Operating expenses are broken down into selling expenses (such as advertising and marketing expenses) and
general and administrative expenses (such as office supplies expense, and depreciation of office equipment).
Deducting the operating expenses from gross margin produces income from operations.
Following income from operations are other revenue and expenses not obtained from selling goods or
services or other daily operations. Other revenue and expenses examples include interest revenue, gains or
losses on sales of assets (buildings, equipment, and machinery), and interest expense. Other revenue and
expenses added to (or deducted from) income from operations produces net income (loss).
A simple income statement is less detailed than the multi-step format. A simple income statement combines
all revenues into one category, followed by all expenses, to produce net income. There are very few individual
accounts and the statement does not consider cost of sales separate from operating expenses.

Demonstration of the Multi-Step Income Statement Format
To demonstrate the use of the multi-step income statement format, let’s continue to discuss California
Business Solutions (CBS). The following is select account data from the adjusted trial balance for the year
ended, December 31, 2018. We will use this information to create a multi-step income statement. Note that the
statements prepared are using a perpetual inventory system.

406

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

The following is the multi-step income statement for CBS.

Demonstration of the Simple Income Statement Format
We will use the same adjusted trial balance information for CBS but will now create a simple income
statement.
The following is the simple income statement for CBS.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

407

Final Analysis of the Two Income Statement Options
While companies may choose the format that best suits their needs, some might choose a combination of
both the multi-step and simple income statement formats. The multi-step income statement may be more
beneficial for internal use and management decision-making because of the detail in account information. The
simple income statement might be more appropriate for external use, as a summary for investors and lenders.
From the information obtained on the income statement, a company can make decisions related to growth
strategies. One ratio that can help them in this process is the Gross Profit Margin Ratio. The gross profit
margin ratio shows the margin of revenue above the cost of goods sold that can be used to cover operating
expenses and profit. The larger the margin, the more availability the company has to reinvest in their business,
pay down debt, and return dividends to shareholders.

Taking our example from CBS, net sales equaled $293,500 and cost of goods sold equaled $180,000. Therefore,
the Gross Profit Margin Ratio is computed as 0.39 (rounded to the nearest hundredth). This means that CBS
has a margin of 39% to cover operating expenses and profit.

Gross profit margin ratio =

⎛
⎝

$293,500 – $180,000⎞⎠
= 0.39, or 39%
$293,500

THINK IT THROUGH
Which Income Statement Format Do I Choose?
You are an accountant for a small retail store and are tasked with determining the best presentation for
your income statement. You may choose to present it in a multi-step format or a simple income
statement format. The information on the statement will be used by investors, lenders, and management
to make financial decisions related to your company. It is important to the store owners that you give
enough information to assist management with decision-making, but not too much information to

408

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

possibly deter investors or lenders. Which statement format do you choose? Why did you choose this
format? What are the benefits and challenges of your statement choice for each stakeholder group?

LINK TO LEARNING
Target Brands, Inc. is an international retailer providing a variety of resale products to consumers. Target
uses a multi-step income statement format found at Target Brands, Inc. annual report
(https://openstax.org/l/50TargetAnnual) to present information to external stakeholders.

6.7

Appendix: Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise Purchases

and Sales Using the Periodic Inventory System
Some organizations choose to report merchandising transactions using a periodic inventory system rather
than a perpetual inventory system. This requires different account usage, transaction recognition,
adjustments, and closing procedures. We will not explore the entries for adjustment or closing procedures but
will look at some of the common situations that occur with merchandising companies and how these
transactions are reported using the periodic inventory system.

Merchandise Purchases
The following example transactions and subsequent journal entries for merchandise purchases are recognized
using a periodic inventory system.

Basic Analysis of Purchase Transaction Journal Entries
To better illustrate merchandising activities under the periodic system, let’s return to the example of California
Business Solutions (CBS). CBS is a retailer providing electronic hardware packages to meet small business
needs. Each electronics hardware package contains a desktop computer, tablet computer, landline telephone,
and a 4-in-1 desktop printer with a printer, copier, scanner, and fax machine.
CBS purchases each electronic product from a manufacturer. The per-item purchase prices from the
manufacturer are shown.

Cash and Credit Purchase Transaction Journal Entries
On April 1, CBS purchases 10 electronic hardware packages at a cost of $620 each. CBS has enough cash-onhand to pay immediately with cash. The following entry occurs.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

409

Purchases-Packages increases (debit) by $6,200 ($620 × 10), and Cash decreases (credit) by the same amount
because the company paid with cash. Under a periodic system, Purchases is used instead of Merchandise
Inventory.
On April 7, CBS purchases 30 desktop computers on credit at a cost of $400 each. The credit terms are n/15
with an invoice date of April 7. The following entry occurs.

Purchases-Desktop Computers increases (debit) for the value of the computers, $12,000 ($400 × 30). Since the
computers were purchased on credit by CBS, Accounts Payable increases (credit) instead of cash.
On April 17, CBS makes full payment on the amount due from the April 7 purchase. The following entry occurs.

Accounts Payable decreases (debit) and Cash decreases (credit) for the full amount owed. The credit terms
were n/15, which is net due in 15 days. No discount was offered with this transaction. Thus the full payment of
$12,000 occurs.

Purchase Discount Transaction Journal Entries
On May 1, CBS purchases 67 tablet computers at a cost of $60 each on credit. Terms are 5/10, n/30, and invoice
dated May 1. The following entry occurs.

Purchases–Tablet Computers increases (debit) in the amount of $4,020 (67 × $60). Accounts Payable also
increases (credit), but the credit terms are a little different than the earlier example. These credit terms include
a discount opportunity (5/10). This means that CBS has 10 days from the invoice date to pay on their account
to receive a 5% discount on their purchase.

410

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

On May 10, CBS pays their account in full. The following entry occurs.

Accounts Payable decreases (debit) for the original amount owed of $4,020 before any discounts are taken.
Since CBS paid on May 10, they made the 10-day window, thus receiving a discount of 5%. Cash decreases
(credit) for the amount owed, less the discount. Purchase Discounts increases (credit) for the amount of the
discount ($4,020 × 5%). Purchase Discounts is considered a contra account and will reduce Purchases at the
end of the period.
Let’s take the same example purchase with the same credit terms, but now assume that CBS paid their
account on May 25. The following entry occurs.

Accounts Payable decreases (debit) and Cash decreases (credit) for $4,020. The company paid on their account
outside of the discount window but within the total allotted timeframe for payment. CBS does not receive a
discount in this case but does pay in full and on time.

Purchase Returns and Allowances Transaction Journal Entries
On June 1, CBS purchased 300 landline telephones with cash at a cost of $60 each. On June 3, CBS discovers
that 25 of the phones are the wrong color and returns the phones to the manufacturer for a full refund. The
following entries occur with the purchase and subsequent return.

Purchases-Phones increases (debit) and Cash decreases (credit) by $18,000 ($60 × 300).

Since CBS already paid in full for their purchase, a full cash refund is issued. This increases Cash (debit) and

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

411

increases (credit) Purchase Returns and Allowances. Purchase Returns and Allowances is a contra account and
decreases Purchases at the end of a period.
On June 8, CBS discovers that 60 more phones from the June 1 purchase are slightly damaged. CBS decides to
keep the phones but receives a purchase allowance from the manufacturer of $8 per phone. The following
entry occurs for the allowance.

Since CBS already paid in full for their purchase, a cash refund of the allowance is issued in the amount of $480
(60 × $8). This increases Cash (debit) and increases Purchase Returns and Allowances.
CBS purchases 80 units of the 4-in-1 desktop printers at a cost of $100 each on July 1 on credit. Terms of the
purchase are 5/15, n/40, with an invoice date of July 1. On July 6, CBS discovers 15 of the printers are damaged
and returns them to the manufacturer for a full refund. The following entries show the purchase and
subsequent return.

Purchases-Printers increases (debit) and Accounts Payable increases (credit) by $8,000 ($100 × 80).

Accounts Payable decreases (debit) and Purchase Returns and Allowances increases (credit) by $1,500 (15 ×
$100). The purchase was on credit and the return occurred before payment. Thus Accounts Payable is debited.
On July 10, CBS discovers that 4 more printers from the July 1 purchase are slightly damaged but decides to
keep them because the manufacturer issues an allowance of $30 per printer. The following entry recognizes
the allowance.

Accounts Payable decreases (debit) and Purchase Returns and Allowances increases (credit) by $120 (4 × $30).
The purchase was on credit and the allowance occurred before payment. Thus, Accounts Payable is debited.

412

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

On July 15, CBS pays their account in full, less purchase returns and allowances. The following payment entry
occurs.

Accounts Payable decreases (debit) for the amount owed, less the return of $1,500 and the allowance of $120
($8,000 – $1,500 – $120). Since CBS paid on July 15, they made the 15-day window and received a discount of
5%. Cash decreases (credit) for the amount owed, less the discount. Purchase Discounts increases (credit) for
the amount of the discount ($6,380 × 5%).

Summary of Purchase Transaction Journal Entries
The chart in Figure 6.16 represents the journal entry requirements based on various merchandising purchase
transactions using the periodic inventory system.

Figure 6.16

Purchase Transaction Journal Entries Flow Chart. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

413

YOUR TURN
Recording a Retailer’s Purchase Transactions using a Periodic Inventory System
Record the journal entries for the following purchase transactions of a retailer, using the periodic
inventory system.
Dec. 3

Purchased $500 worth of inventory on credit with terms 2/10, n/30, and invoice dated
December 3.

Dec. 6

Returned $150 worth of damaged inventory to the manufacturer and received a full refund.

Dec. 9

Customer paid the account in full, less the return.

Solution

Merchandise Sales
The following example transactions and subsequent journal entries for merchandise sales are recognized
using a periodic inventory system.

Basic Analysis of Sales Transaction Journal Entries
Let’s continue to follow California Business Solutions (CBS) and the sale of electronic hardware packages to
business customers. As previously stated, each package contains a desktop computer, tablet computer,
landline telephone, and 4-in-1 printer. CBS sells each hardware package for $1,200. They offer their customers
the option of purchasing extra individual hardware items for every electronic hardware package purchase. The
following is the list of products CBS sells to customers; the prices are per-package, and per unit.

414

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Cash and Credit Sales Transaction Journal Entries
On July 1, CBS sells 10 electronic packages to a customer at a sales price of $1,200 each. The customer pays
immediately with cash. The following entries occur.

Cash increases (debit) and Sales increases (credit) by the selling price of the packages, $12,000 ($1,200 × 10).
Unlike the perpetual inventory system, there is no entry for the cost of the sale. This recognition occurs at the
end of the period with an adjustment to Cost of Goods Sold.
On July 7, CBS sells 20 desktop computers to a customer on credit. The credit terms are n/15 with an invoice
date of July 7. The following entries occur.

Since the computers were purchased on credit by the customer, Accounts Receivable increases (debit) and
Sales increases (credit) by the selling price of the computers, $15,000 ($750 × 20).
On July 17, the customer makes full payment on the amount due from the July 7 sale. The following entry
occurs.

Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) and Cash increases (debit) by the full amount owed. The credit terms
were n/15, which is net due in 15 days. No discount was offered with this transaction, thus the full payment of
$15,000 occurs.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

415

Sales Discount Transaction Journal Entries
On August 1, a customer purchases 56 tablet computers on credit. Terms are 2/10, n/30, and invoice dated
August 1. The following entries occur.

Accounts Receivable increases (debit) and Sales increases (credit) by $16,800 ($300 × 56). These credit terms
are a little different than the earlier example. These credit terms include a discount opportunity (2/10). This
means that the customer has 10 days from the invoice date to pay on their account to receive a 2% discount on
their purchase.
On August 10, the customer pays their account in full. The following entry occurs.

Since the customer paid on August 10, they made the 10-day window, thus receiving a discount of 2%. Cash
increases (debit) for the amount paid to CBS, less the discount. Sales Discounts increases (debit) by the
amount of the discount ($16,800 × 2%), and Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) by the original amount
owed, before discount. Sales Discounts will reduce Sales at the end of the period to produce net sales.
Let’s take the same example sale with the same credit terms, but now assume that the customer paid their
account on August 25. The following entry occurs.

Cash increases (debit) and Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) by $16,800. The customer paid on their
account outside of the discount window but within the total allotted timeframe for payment. The customer
does not receive a discount in this case but does pay in full and on time.

Sales Returns and Allowances Transaction Journal Entries
On September 1, CBS sold 250 landline telephones to a customer who paid with cash. On September 3, the
customer discovers that 40 of the phones are the wrong color and returns the phones to CBS in exchange for a
full refund. The following entries occur for the sale and subsequent return.

416

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Cash increases (debit) and Sales increases (credit) by $37,500 (250 × $150), the sales price of the phones.

Since the customer already paid in full for their purchase, a full cash refund is issued on September 3. This
increases Sales Returns and Allowances (debit) and decreases Cash (credit) by $6,000 (40 × $150). Unlike in the
perpetual inventory system, CBS does not recognize the return of merchandise to inventory. Instead, CBS will
make an adjustment to Merchandise Inventory at the end of the period.
On September 8, the customer discovers that 20 more phones from the September 1 purchase are slightly
damaged. The customer decides to keep the phones but receives a sales allowance from CBS of $10 per
phone. The following entry occurs for the allowance.

Since the customer already paid in full for their purchase, a cash refund of the allowance is issued in the
amount of $200 (20 × $10). This increases (debit) Sales Returns and Allowances and decreases (credit) Cash.
A customer purchases 55 units of the 4-in-1 desktop printers on October 1 on credit. Terms of the sale are 10/
15, n/40, with an invoice date of October 1. On October 6, the customer discovers 10 of the printers are
damaged and returns them to CBS for a full refund. The following entries show the sale and subsequent
return.

Accounts Receivable increases (debit) and Sales increases (credit) by $19,250 (55 × $350), the sales price of the
printers. Accounts Receivable is used instead of Cash because the customer purchased on credit.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

417

The customer has not yet paid for their purchase as of October 6. This increases Sales Returns and Allowances
(debit) and decreases Accounts Receivable (credit) by $3,500 (10 × $350).
On October 10, the customer discovers that 5 more printers from the October 1 purchase are slightly
damaged, but decides to keep them because CBS issues an allowance of $60 per printer. The following entry
recognizes the allowance.

Sales Returns and Allowances increases (debit) and Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) by $300 (5 × $60). A
reduction to Accounts Receivable occurs because the customer has yet to pay their account on October 10.
On October 15, the customer pays their account in full, less sales returns and allowances. The following
payment entry occurs.

Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) for the original amount owed, less the return of $3,500 and the
allowance of $300 ($19,250 – $3,500 – $300). Since the customer paid on October 15, they made the 15-day
window and receiving a discount of 10%. Sales Discounts increases (debit) for the discount amount ($15,450 ×
10%). Cash increases (debit) for the amount owed to CBS, less the discount.

Summary of Sales Transaction Journal Entries
The chart in Figure 6.17 represents the journal entry requirements based on various merchandising sales
transactions using a periodic inventory system.

418

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Figure 6.17

Journal Entry Requirements for Merchandise Sales Transaction Using a Periodic Inventory

System. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

YOUR TURN
Recording a Retailer’s Sales Transactions using a Periodic Inventory System
Record the journal entries for the following sales transactions of a retailer using the periodic inventory
system.
Jan. 5

Sold $2,450 of merchandise on credit (cost of $1,000), with terms 2/10, n/30, and invoice
dated January 5.

Jan. 9

The customer returned $500 worth of slightly damaged merchandise to the retailer and
received a full refund.

Jan. 14

Customer paid the account in full, less the return.

Solution

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

419

420

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Key Terms
cash discount provides a discount on the final price after purchase, if a retailer pays within a discount
window, typically stated in days
cost of goods sold (COGS) expense account that houses all costs associated with getting a product ready for
sale
FOB destination point transportation terms whereby the seller transfers ownership and financial
responsibility at the time of delivery
FOB shipping point transportation terms whereby the seller transfers ownership and financial responsibility
at the time of shipment
freight-in buyer is responsible for when receiving shipment from a seller
freight-out seller is responsible for when shipping to a buyer
goods in transit time in which the merchandise is being transported from the seller to the buyer
gross margin amount available after deducting cost of goods sold from net sales, to cover operating
expenses and profit
gross profit margin ratio proportion of margin a company attains, above their cost of goods sold to cover
operating expenses and profit, calculated by subtracting cost of goods sold from total net revenue to
arrive at gross profit and then taking gross profit divided by total net revenues
gross purchases original amount of the purchase without factoring in reductions for purchase discounts,
returns, or allowances
gross sales original amount of the sale without factoring in reductions for sales discounts, returns, or
allowances
income from operations gross margin less deductions for operating expenses
merchandising company resells finished goods produced by a manufacturer (supplier) to customers
net income when revenues and gains are greater than expenses and losses
net purchases outcome of purchase discounts, returns, and allowances deducted from gross purchases
net sales outcome of sales discounts, returns, and allowances deducted from gross sales
operating cycle amount of time it takes a company to use its cash to provide a product or service and collect
payment from the customer
operating expenses daily operational costs not associated with the direct selling of products or services
other revenue and expenses revenues and expenses not associated with daily operations, or the sale of
goods and services
ownership of inventory which party owns the inventory at a particular point in time, the buyer or the seller
periodic inventory system updates and records the inventory account at certain, scheduled times at the
end of an operating cycle
perpetual inventory system system that automatically updates and records the inventory account every
time a sale or purchase of inventory occurs
physical inventory count manual stock check of inventory to make sure what is recorded on the books
matches what is actually in the warehouse and on the sales floor
point of transfer when the responsibility for the inventory transfers from the seller to the buyer
purchase discounts provide an incentive for the retailer to pay early on their accounts, by issuing a reduced
rate on their final purchase cost; the discount reduces the value of merchandise inventory
purchase returns and allowances retailer receives a partial or full refund from the manufacturer for
defective merchandise
sales discounts reduction in the selling price offered to customers who pay their account within the discount

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

421

period; the actual account is a contra revenue account that reduces sales
sales returns and allowances contra revenue account with a normal debit balance that reduces the gross
sales figure at the end of the period; the customer returns merchandise with a sales return, and keeps the
merchandise with a sales allowance
service company provides intangible services to customers, and does not have inventory
trade discount reduction to the advertised manufacturer’s price during negotiation of a final purchase price

Summary
6.1 Compare and Contrast Merchandising versus Service Activities and Transactions
• Service companies sell intangible services and do not have inventory. Their operating cycle begins with
cash-on-hand, providing service to customers, and collecting customer payments.
• Merchandising companies resell goods to consumers. Their operating cycle begins with cash-on-hand,
purchasing inventory, selling merchandise, and collecting customer payments.
• A purchase discount is an incentive for a retailer to pay their account early. Credit terms establish the
percentage discount, and Merchandise Inventory decreases if the discount is taken.
• A retailer receives a full or partial refund for returning or keeping defective merchandise. This can reduce
the value of the Merchandise Inventory account.
• A customer receives an incentive for paying on their account early. Sales Discounts is a contra revenue
account that will reduce Sales at the end of a period.
• A customer receives a refund for returning or keeping defective merchandise. Sales returns and
allowances is a contra revenue account that will reduce Sales at the end of a period.
6.2 Compare and Contrast Perpetual versus Periodic Inventory Systems
• A perpetual inventory system inventory updates purchase and sales records constantly, particularly
impacting Merchandise Inventory and Cost of Goods Sold.
• A periodic inventory system only records updates to inventory and costs of sales at scheduled times
throughout the year, not constantly. Merchandise Inventory and Cost of Goods Sold are updated at the
end of a period.
• Cost of goods sold (COGS) includes all elements of cost related to the sale of merchandise. The formula to
determine COGS if one is using the periodic inventory system, is Beginning Inventory + Net Purchases –
Ending Inventory.
• The perpetual inventory system keeps real-time data and the information is more robust. However, it is
costly and time consuming, and physical counts of inventory are scarce.
• With the periodic inventory system, there are more frequent inventory counts and reduced chances for
shrinkage and damaged merchandise. However, the periodic system makes it difficult for businesses to
keep track of inventory costs and to make present decisions about their business.
6.3 Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise Purchases Using the Perpetual Inventory System
• A retailer can pay with cash or on credit. If paying with cash, Cash decreases. If paying on credit instead of
cash, Accounts Payable increases.
• If a company pays for merchandise within the discount window, they debit Accounts Payable, credit
Merchandise Inventory, and credit Cash. If they pay outside the discount window, the company debits
Accounts Payable and credits Cash.
• If a company returns merchandise before remitting payment, they would debit Accounts Payable and
credit Merchandise Inventory. If the company returns merchandise after remitting payment, they would
debit Cash and credit Merchandise Inventory.

422

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

• If a company obtains an allowance for damaged merchandise before remitting payment, they would debit
Accounts Payable and credit Merchandise Inventory. If the company obtains an allowance for damaged
merchandise after remitting payment, they would debit Cash and credit Merchandise Inventory.
6.4 Analyze and Record Transactions for the Sale of Merchandise Using the Perpetual Inventory System
• A customer can pay with cash or on credit. If paying on credit instead of cash, Accounts Receivable
increases rather than Cash; Sales increases in both instances. A company must also record the cost of sale
entry, where Merchandise Inventory decreases and COGS increases.
• If a customer pays for merchandise within the discount window, the company would debit Cash and Sales
Discounts while crediting Accounts Receivable. If the customer pays outside the discount window, the
company debits Cash and credits Accounts Receivable only.
• If a customer returns merchandise before remitting payment, the company would debit Sales Returns
and Allowances and credit Accounts Receivable or Cash. The company may return the merchandise to
their inventory by debiting Merchandise Inventory and crediting COGS.
• If a customer obtains an allowance for damaged merchandise before remitting payment, the company
would debit Sales Returns and Allowances and credit Accounts Receivable or Cash. The company does not
have to consider the merchandise condition because the customer keeps the merchandise in this
instance.
6.5 Discuss and Record Transactions Applying the Two Commonly Used Freight-In Methods
• Establishing ownership of inventory is important because it helps determine who is responsible for
shipping charges, goods in transit, and transfer points. Ownership also determines reporting
requirements for the buyer and seller. The buyer is responsible for the merchandise, and the cost of
shipping, insurance, purchase price, taxes, and fees are held in inventory in its Merchandise Inventory
account. The buyer would record an increase (debit) to Merchandise Inventory and either a decrease to
Cash or an increase to Accounts Payable (credit) depending on payment method.
• FOB Shipping Point means the buyer should record the merchandise as inventory when it leaves the
seller’s location. FOB destination means the seller should continue to carry the merchandise in inventory
until it reaches the buyer’s location. This becomes really important at year-end when each party is trying
to determine their actual balance sheet inventory accounts.
• FOB Destination means the seller is responsible for the merchandise, and the cost of shipping is expensed
immediately in the period as a delivery expense. The seller would record an increase (debit) to Delivery
Expense, and a decrease to Cash (credit).
• In FOB Destination, the seller is responsible for the shipping charges and like expenses. The point of
transfer is when the merchandise reaches the buyer’s place of business, and the seller owns the inventory
in transit.
• In FOB Shipping Point, the buyer is responsible for the shipping charges and like expenses. The point of
transfer is when the merchandise leaves the seller’s place of business, and the buyer owns the inventory
in transit.
6.6 Describe and Prepare Multi-Step and Simple Income Statements for Merchandising Companies
• Multi-step income statements provide greater detail than simple income statements. The format
differentiates sales costs from operating expenses and separates other revenue and expenses from
operational activities. This statement is best used internally by managers to make pricing and cost
reduction decisions.
• Simple income statements are not as detailed as multi-step income statements and combine all revenues
and all expenses into general categories. There is no differentiation between operational and non-

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

423

operational activities. Therefore, this statement is sometimes used as a summary for external users to
view general company information.
• The gross profit margin ratio can show a company if they have a significant enough margin after sales
revenue and cost data are computed to cover operational costs and profit goals. If a company is not
meeting their target for this ratio, they may consider increasing prices or decreasing costs.
6.7 Appendix: Analyze and Record Transactions for Merchandise Purchases and Sales Using the Periodic
Inventory System
• A retailer can pay with cash or credit. Unlike in the perpetual inventory system, purchases of inventory in
the periodic inventory system will debit Purchases rather than Merchandise Inventory.
• If a company pays for merchandise within the discount window, it debits Accounts Payable, credits
Purchase Discounts, and credits Cash. If they pay outside the discount window, the company debits
Accounts Payable and credits Cash.
• If a company returns merchandise before remitting payment, they would debit Accounts Payable and
credit Purchase Returns and Allowances. If the company returns merchandise after remitting payment,
they would debit Cash and credit Purchase Returns and Allowances.
• If a company obtains an allowance for damaged merchandise before remitting payment, they would debit
Accounts Payable and credit Purchase Returns and Allowances. If the company obtains an allowance for
damaged merchandise after remitting payment, they would debit Cash and credit Purchase Returns and
Allowances.
• A customer can pay with cash or on credit. Unlike a perpetual inventory system, when recording a sale
under a periodic system, there is no cost entry.
• If a customer pays for merchandise within the discount window, the company would debit Cash and Sales
Discounts and credit Accounts Receivable. If the customer pays outside the discount window, the
company debits Cash and credits Accounts Receivable only.
• If a customer returns merchandise before remitting payment, the company would debit Sales Returns
and Allowances and credit Accounts Receivable or Cash.
• If a customer obtains an allowance for damaged merchandise before remitting payment, the company
would debit Sales Returns and Allowances and credit Accounts Receivable or Cash.
Note: All of the following assessments assume a periodic inventory system unless otherwise noted.

Multiple Choice
1.

6.1 Which of the following is an example of a contra revenue account?
A.

sales

B.

merchandise inventory

C.

sales discounts

D.

accounts payable

2.

6.1 What accounts are used to recognize a retailer’s purchase from a manufacturer on credit?
A.

accounts receivable, merchandise inventory

B.

accounts payable, merchandise inventory

C.

accounts payable, cash

D.

sales, accounts receivable

424

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

3.

6.1 Which of the following numbers represents the discount percentage applied if a customer pays

within a discount window and credit terms are 3/15, n/60?
A.

3

B.

15

C.

60

D.

3 and 15

4.

6.1 If a customer purchases merchandise on credit and returns the defective merchandise before

payment, what accounts would recognize this transaction?
A.

sales discount, cash

B.

sales returns and allowances, cash

C.

accounts receivable, sales discount

D.

accounts receivable, sales returns and allowances

5.

6.2 Which of the following is a disadvantage of the perpetual inventory system?
A.

Inventory information is in real-time.

B.

Inventory is automatically updated.

C.

It allows managers to make current decisions about purchases, stock, and sales.

D.

It is cost-prohibitive.

6.

6.2 Which of the following is an advantage of the periodic inventory system?
A.

frequent physical inventory counts

B.

cost prohibitive

C.

time consuming

D.

real-time information for managers

7.

6.2 Which of the following is not a reason for the physical inventory count to differ from what is

recognized on the company’s books?
A.

mismanagement

B.

shrinkage

C.

damage

D.

sale of services to customers

8.

6.2 Which of the following is not included when computing Net Purchases?
A.

purchase discounts

B.

beginning inventory

C.

purchase returns

D.

purchase allowances

9.

6.3 Which of the following accounts are used when recording a purchase?
A.

cash, merchandise inventory

B.

accounts payable, merchandise inventory

C.

A or B

D.

cash, accounts payable

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

10.

425

6.3 A retailer pays on credit for $650 worth of inventory, terms 3/10, n/40. If the merchandiser pays

within the discount window, how much will the retailer remit in cash to the manufacturer?
A.

$19.50

B.

$630.50

C.

$650

D.

$195

11.

6.3 A retailer returns $400 worth of inventory to a manufacturer and receives a full refund. What

accounts recognize this return before the retailer remits payment to the manufacturer?
A.

accounts payable, merchandise inventory

B.

accounts payable, cash

C.

cash, merchandise inventory

D.

merchandise inventory, cost of goods sold

12.

6.3 A retailer obtains a purchase allowance from the manufacturer in the amount of $600 for faulty

inventory parts. Which of the following represents the journal entry for this transaction if the retailer has
already remitted payment?
A.

B.

C.

13.

6.4 Which of the following accounts are used when recording the sales entry of a sale on credit?
A.

merchandise inventory, cash

B.

accounts receivable, merchandise inventory

C.

accounts receivable, sales

D.

sales, cost of goods sold

14.

6.4 A customer pays on credit for $1,250 worth of merchandise, terms 4/15, n/30. If the customer pays

within the discount window, how much will they remit in cash to the retailer?
A.

$1,250

B.

$1,200

C.

$50

D.

$500

426

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

15.

6.4 A customer returns $870 worth of merchandise and receives a full refund. What accounts recognize

this sales return (disregarding the merchandise condition entry) if the return occurs before the customer
remits payment to the retailer?
A.

accounts receivable, sales returns and allowances

B.

accounts receivable, cash

C.

sales returns and allowances, merchandise inventory

D.

accounts receivable, cost of goods sold

16.

6.4 A customer obtains a purchase allowance from the retailer in the amount of $220 for damaged

merchandise. Which of the following represents the journal entry for this transaction if the customer has not
yet remitted payment?
A.

B.

C.

17.

6.5 Which of the following is not a characteristic of FOB Destination?
A.

The seller pays for shipping.

B.

The seller owns goods in transit.

C.

The point of transfer is when the goods leave the seller’s place of business.

D.

The point of transfer is when the goods arrive at the buyer’s place of business.

18.

6.5 Which two accounts are used to recognize shipping charges for a buyer, assuming the buyer

purchases with cash and the terms are FOB Shipping Point?
A.

delivery expense, cash

B.

merchandise inventory, cash

C.

merchandise inventory, accounts payable

D.

The buyer does not record anything for shipping since it is FOB Shipping Point.

19.

6.5 Which of the following is not a characteristic of FOB Shipping Point?
A.

The buyer pays for shipping.

B.

The buyer owns goods in transit.

C.

The point of transfer is when the goods leave the seller’s place of business.

D.

The point of transfer is when the goods arrive at the buyer’s place of business.

20.

6.6 A multi-step income statement ________.
A.

separates cost of goods sold from operating expenses

B.

considers interest revenue an operating activity

C.

is another name for a simple income statement

D.

combines cost of goods sold and operating expenses

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

21.

427

6.6 Which of the following accounts would be reported under operating expenses on a multi-step

income statement?
A.

sales

B.

advertising expense

C.

sales returns and allowances

D.

interest expense

22.

6.6 A simple income statement ________.
A.

combines all revenues into one category

B.

does not combine all expenses into one category

C.

separates cost of goods sold from operating expenses

D.

separates revenues into several categories

23.

6.6 Which of the following accounts would not be reported under revenue on a simple income

statement?
A.

interest revenue

B.

net sales

C.

rent revenue

D.

operating expenses

24.

6.7 Which of the following accounts are used when recording a purchase using a periodic inventory

system?
A.

cash, purchases

B.

accounts payable, sales

C.

accounts payable, accounts receivable

D.

cash, merchandise inventory

25.

6.7 A retailer obtains a purchase allowance from the manufacturer in the amount of $600 for faulty

inventory parts. Which of the following represents the journal entry for this transaction, assuming the retailer
has already remitted payment?
A.

B.

C.

26.

6.7 A customer returns $690 worth of merchandise and receives a full refund. What accounts recognize

this sales return, assuming the customer has not yet remitted payment to the retailer?
A.

accounts receivable, sales returns and allowances

B.

accounts receivable, cash

C.

sales returns and allowances, purchases

D.

sales discounts, cost of goods sold

428

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

27.

6.7 A customer obtains an allowance from the retailer in the amount of $450 for damaged merchandise.

Which of the following represents the journal entry for this transaction, assuming the customer has not
remitted payment?
A.

B.

C.

Questions
1.

6.1 What are some benefits to a retailer for offering a discount to a customer?

2.

6.1 What do credit terms of 4/10, n/30 mean in regard to a purchase?

3.

6.1 What is the difference between a sales return and a sales allowance?

4.

6.1 If a retailer made a purchase in the amount of $350 with credit terms of 2/15, n/60. What would the

retailer pay in cash if they received the discount?
5.

6.2 What are two advantages and disadvantages of the perpetual inventory system?

6.

6.2 What are two advantages and disadvantages of the periodic inventory system?

7.

6.2 Sunrise Flowers sells flowers to a customer on credit for $130 on October 18, with a cost of sale to

Sunrise of $50. What entry to recognize this sale is required if Sunrise Flowers uses a periodic inventory
system?
8.

6.2 Sunrise Flowers sells flowers to a customer on credit for $130 on October 18, with a cost of sale to

Sunrise of $50. What entry to recognize this sale is required if Sunrise Flowers uses a perpetual inventory
system?
9.
10.

6.3 Name two situations where cash would be remitted to a retailer from a manufacturer after purchase.
6.3 If a retailer purchased inventory in the amount of $750, terms 2/10, n/60, returned $30 of the

inventory for a full refund, and received an allowance for $95, how much would the discount be if the retailer
remitted payment within the discount window?
11.

6.3 A retailer discovers that 50% of the total inventory items delivered from the manufacturer are

damaged. The original purchase for all inventory was $1,100. The retailer decides to return 20% of the
damaged inventory for a full refund and keep the remaining 80% of damaged inventory. What is the value of
the merchandise returned?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

429

12.

6.4 Name two situations where cash would be remitted to a customer from a retailer after purchase.

13.

6.4 If a customer purchased merchandise in the amount of $340, terms 3/10, n/30, returned $70 of the

inventory for a full refund, and received an allowance for $65, how much discount would be applied if the
customer remitted payment within the discount window?
14.

6.4 A customer discovers 60% of the total merchandise delivered from a retailer is damaged. The

original purchase for all merchandise was $3,600. The customer decides to return 35% of the damaged
merchandise for a full refund and keep the remaining 65%. What is the value of the merchandise returned?
15.

6.5 What are the main differences between FOB Destination and FOB Shipping Point?

16.

6.5 A buyer purchases $250 worth of goods on credit from a seller. Shipping charges are $50. The terms

of the purchase are 2/10, n/30, FOB Destination. What, if any, journal entry or entries will the buyer record for
these transactions?
17.

6.5 A seller sells $800 worth of goods on credit to a customer, with a cost to the seller of $300. Shipping

charges are $100. The terms of the sale are 2/10, n/30, FOB Destination. What, if any, journal entry or entries
will the seller record for these transactions?
18.

6.5 Which statement and where on the statement is freight-out recorded? Why is it recorded there?

19.

6.6 The following is select account information for Sunrise Motors. Sales: $256,400; Sales Returns and

Allowances: $34,890; COGS: $120,470; Sales Discounts: $44,760. Given this information, what is the Gross Profit
Margin Ratio for Sunrise Motors? (Round to the nearest whole percentage.)
20.

6.6 What is the difference between a multi-step and simple income statement?

21.

6.6 How can an investor or lender use the Gross Profit Margin Ratio to make financial contribution

decisions?
22.

6.6 The following is select account information for August Sundries. Sales: $850,360; Sales Returns and

Allowances: $148,550; COGS: $300,840; Operating Expenses: $45,770; Sales Discounts: $231,820. If August
Sundries uses a multi-step income statement format, what is their gross margin?
23.

6.7 If a retailer purchased inventory in the amount of $680, terms 3/10, n/60, returned $120 of the

inventory for a full refund, and received an allowance for $70, how much would the discount be if the retailer
remitted payment within the discount window?
24.

6.7 A customer discovers 50% of the total merchandise delivered from the retailer is damaged. The

original purchase for all merchandise was $5,950. The customer decides to return 40% of the damaged
merchandise for a full refund and keep the remaining 60%. What is the value of the merchandise returned?
25.

6.7 What is the difference in reporting requirements for customer-returned merchandise in sellable

condition under a perpetual inventory system versus a periodic inventory system?

430

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

Exercise Set A
EA1.

6.1 On March 1, Bates Board Shop sells 300 surfboards to a local lifeguard station at a sales price of

$400 per board. The cost to Bates is $140 per board. The terms of the sale are 3/15, n/30, with an invoice date
of March 1. Create the journal entries for Bates to recognize the following transactions.
A.

the initial sale

B.

the subsequent customer payment on March 10

EA2.

6.1 Marx Corp. purchases 135 fax machines on credit from a manufacturer on April 7 at a price of $250

per machine. Terms of the purchase are 4/10, n/20 with an invoice date of April 7. Marx Corp pays in full for
the fax machines on April 17. Create the journal entries for Marx Corp. to record:
A.

the initial purchase

B.

the subsequent payment on April 17

EA3.

6.1 Match each of the following terms with the best corresponding definition.

A. Sales allowance

i. A customer returns merchandise for a full refund

B. Purchase return

ii. A retailer receives a partial refund but keeps the defective merchandise

C. Sales discount

iii. A customer receives a partial refund but keeps the defective merchandise

D. Purchase discount

iv. A customer pays their account in full within the discount window

E. Sales return

v. A type of purchase discount negotiated between a manufacturer and a retailer
before settlement on a final price

F. Trade discount

vi. A retailer returns merchandise for a full refund

G. Purchase allowance

vii. A retailer pays their account in full within the discount window

EA4.

6.2 The following is selected information from Mars Corp. Compute net purchases, and cost of goods

sold for the month of March.

EA5.

6.2 On April 5, a customer returns 20 bicycles with a sales price of $250 per bike to Barrio Bikes. Each

bike cost Barrio Bikes $100. The customer had yet to pay on their account. The bikes are in sellable condition.
Prepare the journal entry or entries to recognize this return if the company uses
A.

the perpetual inventory system

B.

the periodic inventory system

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

EA6.

431

6.3 Record journal entries for the following purchase transactions of Flower Company.

Oct. 13

Purchased 85 bushels of flowers with cash for $1,300.

Oct. 20

Purchased 240 bushels of flowers for $20 per bushel on credit. Terms of the purchase are 5/10,
n/30, invoice dated October 20.

Oct. 30
EA7.

Paid account in full from the October 20 purchase.

6.3 Record journal entries for the following purchase transactions of Apex Industries.

Nov. 6

Purchased 24 computers on credit for $560 per computer. Terms of the purchase are 4/10, n/60,
invoice dated November 6.

Nov. 10

Returned 5 defective computers for a full refund from the manufacturer.

Nov. 22

Paid account in full from the November 6 purchase.

EA8.

6.3 Record the journal entry for each of the following transactions. Glow Industries purchases 750

strobe lights at $23 per light from a manufacturer on April 20. The terms of purchase are 10/15, n/40, invoice
dated April 20. On April 22, Glow discovers 100 of the lights are the wrong model and is granted an allowance
of $8 per light for the error. On April 30, Glow pays for the lights, less the allowance.
EA9.

6.4 Record journal entries for the following sales transactions of Flower Company.

Oct. 12

Sold 25 bushels of flowers to a customer for $1,000 cash; cost of sale $700.

Oct. 21

Sold 40 bushels of flowers for $30 per bushel on credit. Terms of the sale are 4/10, n/30, invoice
dated October 21. Cost per bushel is $20 to Flower Company.

Oct. 31
EA10.
Nov. 7

Received payment in full from the October 21 sale.
6.4 Record the journal entries for the following sales transactions of Apache Industries.
Sold 10 computers on credit for $870 per computer. Terms of the sale are 5/10, n/60, invoice
dated November 7. The cost per computer to Apache is $560.

Nov. 14

The customer returned 2 computers for a full refund from Apache. Apache returns the
computers to their inventory at full cost of $560 per computer.

Nov. 21
EA11.

The customer paid their account in full from the November 7 sale.
6.4 Record the journal entry or entries for each of the following sales transactions. Glow Industries

sells 240 strobe lights at $40 per light to a customer on May 9. The cost to Glow is $23 per light. The terms of
the sale are 5/15, n/40, invoice dated May 9. On May 13, the customer discovers 50 of the lights are the wrong
color and are granted an allowance of $10 per light for the error. On May 21, the customer pays for the lights,
less the allowance.

432

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

EA12.

6.5 Review the following situations and record any necessary journal entries for Mequon’s Boutique.

May 10

Mequon’s Boutique purchases $2,400 worth of merchandise with cash from a manufacturer.
Shipping charges are an extra $130 cash. Terms of the purchase are FOB Shipping Point.

May 14

Mequon’s Boutique sells $3,000 worth of merchandise to a customer who pays with cash. The
merchandise has a cost to Mequon’s of $1,750. Shipping charges are an extra $150 cash. Terms
of the sale are FOB Shipping Point.

EA13.

6.5 Review the following situations and record any necessary journal entries for Letter Depot.

Mar. 9

Letter Depot purchases $11,420 worth of merchandise on credit from a manufacturer. Shipping
charges are an extra $480 cash. Terms of the purchase are 2/10, n/40, FOB Destination, invoice
dated March 9.

Mar. 20

Letter Depot sells $7,530 worth of merchandise to a customer who pays on credit. The
merchandise has a cost to Letter Depot of $2,860. Shipping charges are an extra $440 cash.
Terms of the sale are 3/15, n/50, FOB Destination, invoice dated March 20.

EA14.

6.5 Review the following situations and record any necessary journal entries for Nine Lives Inc.

Jan. 15

Nine Lives Inc. purchases $8,770 worth of merchandise with cash from a manufacturer. Shipping
charges are an extra $345 cash. Terms of the purchase are FOB Shipping Point.

Jan. 23

Nine Lives Inc. sells $4,520 worth of merchandise to a customer who pays with cash. The
merchandise has a cost to Nine Lives of $3,600. Shipping charges are an extra $190 cash. Terms
of the sale are FOB Destination.

EA15.

6.6 The following select account data is taken from the records of Reese Industries for 2019.

A.

Use the data provided to compute net sales for 2019.

B.

Prepare a simple income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

C.

Compute the gross margin for 2019.

D.

Prepare a multi-step income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

EA16.

433

6.7 Record journal entries for the following purchase transactions of Flower Company.

A.

On October 13, Flower Company purchased 85 bushels of flowers with cash for $1,300.

B.

On October 20, Flower Company purchased 240 bushels of flowers for $20 per bushel on credit. Terms
of the purchase were 5/10, n/30, invoice dated October 20.

C.

On October 30, Flower Company paid its account in full for the October 20 purchase.

EA17.

6.7 Record journal entries for the following purchase transactions of Apex Industries.

Nov. 6

Purchased 24 computers on credit for $560 per computer. Terms of the purchase are 4/10, n/60,
invoice dated November 6.

Nov. 10

Returned 5 defective computers for a full refund from the manufacturer.

Nov. 22

Paid account in full from the November 6 purchase.

EA18.

6.7 Record the journal entries for the following sales transactions of Julian Sundries.

Nov. 7

Sold 10 tables on credit for $870 per table. Terms of the sale are 5/10, n/60, invoice dated
November 7. The cost per table to Julian is $560.

Nov. 14

The customer returned 2 slightly damaged tables for a full refund from Julian.

Nov. 21

The customer paid their account in full from the November 7 sale.

EA19.

6.7 Record the journal entry or entries for each of the following sales transactions. Glow Industries

sells 240 strobe lights at $40 per light to a customer on May 9. The cost to Glow is $23 per light. The terms of
the sale are 5/15, n/40, invoice dated May 9. On May 13, the customer discovers 50 of the lights are the wrong
color and are granted an allowance of $10 per light for the error. On May 21, the customer pays for the lights,
less the allowance.

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

6.1 On June 1, Lupita Candy Supplies sells 1,250 candy buckets to a local school at a sales price of $10

per bucket. The cost to Lolita is $2 per bucket. The terms of the sale are 2/10, n/60, with an invoice date of June
1. Create the journal entries for Lupita to recognize the following transactions.
A.

the initial sale

B.

the subsequent customer payment on July 12

EB2.

6.1 Ariel Enterprises purchases 32 cellular telephones on credit from a manufacturer on November 3

at a price of $400 per phone. Terms of the purchase are 3/5, n/30 with an invoice date of November 3. Ariel
Enterprises pays in full for the phones on November 6. Create the journal entries for Ariel Enterprises for the
following transactions.
A.

the initial purchase

B.

the subsequent payment on November 6

434

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

EB3.
A.

6.1 For each of the following statements, fill in the blanks with the correct account names.
A retailer purchases merchandise on credit. The retailer would recognize this transaction by debiting
_____ and crediting _______.

B.

A retailer pays for purchased merchandise within the discount window. The retailer would recognize
this transaction by debiting ________ and crediting _________ and ________.

C.

A customer returns merchandise to the retailer and receives a full refund. The retailer would recognize
this transaction by debiting _________ and crediting _________ if the customer had not yet paid on their
account.

D.

A customer pays for purchased merchandise within the discount window. The retailer would recognize
this transaction by debiting ________ and _______, and crediting _________.

EB4.

6.2 The following is selected information from Orange Industries. Compute net purchases, and cost of

goods sold for the month of June.

EB5.

6.2 On April 20, Barrio Bikes purchased 30 bicycles at a cost of $100 per bike. Credit terms were 4/10,

n/30, with an invoice date of April 20. On April 26, Barrio Bikes pays in full for the purchase. Prepare the journal
entry or entries to recognize the purchase and subsequent payment if Barrio Bikes uses:
A.

the perpetual inventory system

B.

the periodic inventory system

EB6.

6.3 Blue Barns purchased 888 gallons of paint at $19 per gallon from a supplier on June 3. Terms of the

purchase are 2/15, n/45, invoice dated June 3. Blue Barns pays their account in full on June 20. On June 22, Blue
Barns discovers 20 gallons are the wrong color and returns the gallons for a full cash refund. Record the
journal entries to recognize these transactions for Blue Barns.
EB7.

6.3 Canary Lawnmowers purchased 300 lawnmower parts at $3.50 per part from a supplier on

December 4. Terms of the purchase are 4/10, n/25, invoice dated December 4. Canary Lawnmowers pays their
account in full on December 16. On December 21, Canary discovers 34 of the parts are the wrong size but
decides to keep them after the supplier gives Canary an allowance of $1.00 per part. Record the journal entries
to recognize these transactions for Canary Lawnmowers.
EB8.

6.3 Record journal entries for the following purchase transactions of Balloon Depot.

Feb. 8

Purchased 3,000 balloon bundles on credit for $25 per bundle. Terms of the purchase are 10/10,
n/30, invoice dated February 8.

Feb. 11

Returned 450 defective bundles for a full refund from the manufacturer.

Feb. 18

Paid account in full from the February 8 purchase.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

EB9.

435

6.4 Blue Barns sold 136 gallons of paint at $31 per gallon on July 6 to a customer with a cost of $19 per

gallon to Blue Barns. Terms of the sale are 2/15, n/45, invoice dated July 6. The customer pays their account in
full on July 24. On July 28, the customer discovers 17 gallons are the wrong color and returns the paint for a full
cash refund. Blue Barns returns the gallons to their inventory at the original cost per gallon. Record the journal
entries to recognize these transactions for Blue Barns.
EB10.

6.4 Canary Lawnmowers sold 70 lawnmower parts at $5.00 per part to a customer on December 4

with a cost to Canary of $3.00 per part. Terms of the sale are 5/10, n/25, invoice dated December 4. The
customer pays their account in full on December 16. On December 21, the customer discovers 22 of the parts
are the wrong size but decides to keep them after Canary gives them an allowance of $1.00 per part. Record
the journal entries to recognize these transactions for Canary Lawnmowers.
EB11.
Mar. 8

6.4 Record journal entries for the following sales transactions of Balloon Depot.
Sold 570 balloon bundles to a customer on credit for $38 per bundle. The cost to Balloon Depot
was $25 per bundle. Terms of the sale are 3/10, n/30, invoice dated March 8.

Mar. 11

The customer returned 70 bundles for a full refund from Balloon Depot. Balloon Depot returns
the balloons to their inventory at the original cost of $25 per bundle.

Mar. 18
EB12.
Feb. 13

The customer paid their account in full from the March 8 purchase.
6.5 Review the following situations and record any necessary journal entries for Lumber Farm.
Lumber Farm purchases $9,650 worth of merchandise with cash from a manufacturer. Shipping
charges are an extra $210 cash. Terms of the purchase are FOB Destination.

Feb. 19

Lumber Farm sells $5,670 worth of merchandise to a customer who pays with cash. The
merchandise has a cost to Lumber Farm of $2,200. Shipping charges are an extra $230 cash.
Terms of the sale are FOB Destination.

EB13.
Jun. 12

6.5 Review the following situations and record any necessary journal entries for Clubs Unlimited.
Clubs Unlimited purchases $3,540 worth of merchandise on credit from a manufacturer.
Shipping charges are an extra $150 cash. Terms of the purchase are 2/10, n/45, FOB Shipping
Point, invoice dated June 12.

Jun. 18

Clubs Unlimited sells $8,200 worth of merchandise to a customer who pays on credit. The
merchandise has a cost to Clubs Unlimited of $3,280. Shipping charges are an extra $150 cash.
Terms of the sale are 3/15, n/30, FOB Shipping Point, invoice dated June 18.

EB14.
Dec. 6

6.5 Review the following situations and record any necessary journal entries for Wall World.
Wall World purchases $5,510 worth of merchandise on credit from a manufacturer. Shipping
charges are an extra $146 cash. Terms of the purchase are 2/15, n/40, FOB Shipping Point,
invoice dated December 6.

Dec. 10

Wall World sells $3,590 worth of merchandise to a customer, who pays on credit. The
merchandise has a cost to Wall World of $1,400. Shipping charges are an extra $115 cash. Terms
of the sale are 4/10, n/30, FOB Destination, invoice dated December 10.

436

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

EB15.

6.6 The following select account data is taken from the records of Carnival Express for 2019.

A.

Use the data provided to compute net sales for 2019.

B.

Prepare a simple income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

C.

Compute the gross margin for 2019.

D.

Prepare a multi-step income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

EB16.

6.7 Canary Lawnmowers purchased 300 lawnmower parts at $3.50 per part from a supplier on

December 4. Terms of the purchase are 4/10, n/25, invoice dated December 4. Canary Lawnmowers pays their
account in full on December 16. On December 21, Canary discovers 34 of the parts are the wrong size, but
decides to keep them after the supplier gives Canary an allowance of $1.00 per part. Record the journal entries
to recognize these transactions for Canary Lawnmowers.
EB17.
Feb. 8

6.7 Record journal entries for the following purchase transactions of Balloon Depot.
Purchased 3,000 balloon bundles on credit for $25 per bundle. Terms of the purchase are 2/10,
n/30, invoice dated February 8.

Feb. 11

Returned 450 defective bundles for a full refund from the manufacturer.

Feb. 18

Paid account in full from the February 8 purchase.

EB18.

6.7 Canary Lawnmowers sold 75 lawnmower parts at $5.00 per part to a customer on December 4.

The cost to Canary is $3.00 per part. Terms of the sale are 4/10, n/25, invoice dated December 4. The customer
pays their account in full on December 16. On December 21, the customer discovers 22 of the parts are the
wrong size, but decides to keep them after Canary gives them an allowance of $1.00 per part. Record the
journal entries to recognize these transactions for Canary Lawnmowers.
EB19.
Mar. 8

6.7 Record journal entries for the following sales transactions of Balloon Depot.
Sold 570 balloon bundles to a customer on credit for $38 per bundle. The cost to Balloon Depot
is $25 per bundle. Terms of the sale are 3/10, n/30, invoice dated March 8.

Mar. 11

The customer returned 70 bundles for a full refund from Balloon Depot.

Mar. 18

The customer paid their account in full from the March 8 purchase.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

437

Problem Set A
PA1.
A.

6.1 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Furniture Warehouse.
Aug. 3: Sold 15 couches at $500 each to a customer, credit terms 2/15, n/30, invoice date August 3; the
couches cost Furniture Warehouse $150 each.

B.

Aug. 8: Customer returned 2 couches for a full refund. The merchandise was in sellable condition at the
original cost.

C.

Aug. 15: Customer found 4 defective couches but kept the merchandise for an allowance of $1,000.

D.

Aug. 18: Customer paid their account in full with cash.

PA2.
A.

6.1 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Barrera Suppliers.
May 12: Sold 32 deluxe hammers at $195 each to a customer, credit terms 10/10, n/45, invoice date
May 12; the deluxe hammers cost Barrera Suppliers $88 each.

B.

May 15: Customer returned 6 hammers for a full refund. The merchandise was in sellable condition at
the original cost.

C.

May 20: Customer found 2 defective hammers but kept the merchandise for an allowance of $200.

D.

May 22: Customer paid their account in full with cash.

PA3.

6.2 Costume Warehouse sells costumes and accessories. Review the following transactions and

prepare the journal entry or entries if Costume Warehouse uses:
A.

the perpetual inventory system

B.

the periodic inventory system

May 3

A customer purchases 45 costumes at a sales price of $35 per costume. The cost to Costume
Warehouse per costume is $15. The terms of the sale are 3/15, n/60, with an invoice date of May
3.

May 10

The customer who made the May 3 purchase returns 5 of the costumes to the store for a full
refund, claiming they were the wrong size. The costumes were returned to Costume
Warehouse’s inventory at $15 per costume.

May 16
PA4.

The customer pays in full for the remaining costumes, less the return.

6.2 Pharmaceutical Supplies sells medical supplies to customers. Review the following transactions

and prepare the journal entry or entries if Pharmaceutical Supplies uses:
A.

the perpetual inventory system

B.

the periodic inventory system

Jul. 9

A customer purchases 50 pairs of crutches at a sales price of $20 per pair. The cost to
Pharmaceutical Supplies per pair is $8.00. The terms of the sale are 5/10, n/30, with an invoice
date of July 9.

Jul. 12

The customer who made the July 9 purchase returns 9 of the pairs to the store for a full refund,
claiming they were the wrong size. The crutch pairs were returned to the store’s inventory at
$8.00 per pair.

Jul. 18

The customer pays in full for the remaining crutches, less the return.

438

PA5.

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

6.3 Review the following transactions for Birdy Birdhouses and record any required journal entries.

Sep. 6

Birdy Birdhouses purchases 55 birdhouses at $40 each with cash.

Sep. 8

Birdy Birdhouses purchases 80 birdhouses at $45 each on credit. Terms of the purchase are 2/10,
n/30, invoice date September 8.

Sep. 10

Birdy discovers 10 of the birdhouses are damaged from the Sept 6 purchase and returns them to
the supplier for a full refund. Birdy also discovers that 10 of the birdhouses from the Sept 8
purchase are painted the wrong color but keeps them since the supplier granted an allowance
of $20 per birdhouse.

Sep. 18

Birdy pays their account in full from the September 8 purchase, less any returns, allowances,
and/or discounts.

PA6.

6.3 Review the following transactions for Dish Mart and record any required journal entries. Note that

all purchase transactions are with the same supplier.
Nov. 5

Dish Mart purchases 26 sets of dishes for $460 per set with cash.

Nov. 9

Dish Mart purchases 30 sets of dishes for $430 per set on credit. Terms of the purchase are 10/
15, n/60, invoice date November 9.

Nov. 13

Dish Mart discovers 5 of the dish sets are damaged from the November 9 purchase and returns
them to the supplier for a full refund.

Nov. 14

Dish Mart purchases 10 sets of dishes for $450 per set, on credit. Terms of the purchase are 10/
10, n/60, invoice date November 14.

Nov. 15

Dish Mart discovers that 2 of the dish sets from the November 14 purchase and 4 of the dish
sets from the November 5 purchase are missing a few dishes but keeps them since the supplier
granted an allowance of $50 per set for the November 14 dish sets and $75 per set for the
November 5 dish sets. Dish Mart and the supplier have agreed to reduce the amount Dish Mart
has outstanding debt, instead of sending a separate check for the November 5 allowance in
cash.

Nov. 24

Dish Mart pays their account in full for all outstanding purchases, less any returns, allowances,
and/or discounts.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

PA7.

439

6.4 Review the following sales transactions for Birdy Birdhouses and record any required journal

entries.
Aug. 10

Birdy Birdhouses sells 20 birdhouses to customer Julia Brand at a price of $70 each in exchange
for cash. The cost to Birdy is $46 per birdhouse.

Aug. 12

Birdy Birdhouses sells 30 birdhouses to customer Julia Brand at a price of $68 each on credit.
The cost of sale for Birdy is $44 per birdhouse. Terms of the sale are 2/10, n/30, invoice date
August 12.

Aug. 14

Julia discovers 6 of the birdhouses are slightly damaged from the August 10 purchase and
returns them to Birdy for a full refund. Birdy is able to return the birdhouses to their inventory
at the original cost of $46 each. Julia also discovers that 10 of the birdhouses from the August 12
purchase are painted the wrong color but keeps them since Birdy granted an allowance of $24
per birdhouse.

Aug. 20

Julia pays her account in full from the August 12 purchase, less any returns, allowances, and/or
discounts.

PA8.

6.4 Review the following sales transactions for Dish Mart and record any required journal entries. Note

that all sales transactions are with the same customer, Emma Purcell.
Mar. 5

Dish Mart made a cash sale of 13 sets of dishes at a price of $700 per set to customer Emma
Purcell. The cost per set is $460 to Dish Mart.

Mar. 9

Dish Mart sold 23 sets of dishes to Emma for $650 per set on credit, at a cost to Dish Mart of
$435 per set. Terms of the sale are 5/15, n/60, invoice date March 9.

Mar. 13

Emma returns eight of the dish sets from the March 9 sale to Dish Mart for a full refund. Dish
Mart returns the dish sets to inventory at their original cost of $435 per set.

Mar. 14

Dish Mart sells 6 sets of dishes to Emma for $670 per set on credit, at a cost to Dish Mart of $450
per set. Terms of the sale are 5/10, n/60, invoice date March 14.

Mar. 15

Emma discovers that 3 of the dish sets from the March 14 purchase, and 7 of the dish sets from
the March 5 sale are missing a few dishes, but keeps them since Dish Mart granted an allowance
of $2,670 for all 10 dish sets. Dish Mart and Emma have agreed to reduce the amount Dish Mart
has outstanding instead of sending a separate check for the March 5 allowance in cash.

Mar. 24

Emma Purcell pays her account in full for all outstanding purchases, less any returns,
allowances, and/or discounts.

440

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

PA9.

6.5 Record the following purchase transactions of Money Office Supplies.

Aug. 3

Purchased 45 chairs on credit, at a cost of $55 per chair. Shipping charges are an extra $3 cash
per chair and are not subject to discount. Terms of the purchase are 4/10, n/60, FOB Shipping
Point, invoice dated August 3.

Aug. 7

Purchased 30 chairs with cash, at a cost of $50 per chair. Shipping charges are an extra $4.50
cash per chair and are not subject to discount. Terms of the purchase are FOB Destination.

Aug. 12
PA10.

Money Office Supplies pays in full for their purchase on August 3.
6.6 The following is the adjusted trial balance data for Nino’s Pizzeria as of December 31, 2019.

A.

Use the data provided to compute net sales for 2019.

B.

Compute the gross margin for 2019.

C.

Compute the gross profit margin ratio (rounded to nearest hundredth).

D.

Prepare a simple income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

E.

Prepare a multi-step income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

PA11.

441

6.6 The following is the adjusted trial balance data for Emma’s Alterations as of December 31, 2019.

A.

Use the data provided to compute net sales for 2019.

B.

Compute the gross margin for 2019.

C.

Compute the gross profit margin ratio (rounded to nearest hundredth).

D.

Prepare a simple income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

E.

Prepare a multi-step income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

PA12.

6.7 Review the following transactions for Birdy Birdhouses and record any required journal entries.

Sep. 6

Birdy Birdhouses purchases 57 birdhouses at $46 each with cash.

Sep. 8

Birdy Birdhouses purchases 94 birdhouses at $44 each on credit. Terms of the purchase are 2/10,
n/30, invoice date September 8.

Sep. 10

Birdy discovers 12 of the birdhouses are damaged from the Sept 6 purchase and returns them to
the supplier for a full refund. Birdy also discovers that 11 of the birdhouses from the Sept 8
purchase are painted the wrong color but keeps them since the supplier granted an allowance
of $136.

Sep. 18

Birdy pays their account in full from the September 8 purchase, less any returns, allowances,
and/or discounts.

442

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

PA13.

6.7 Review the following sales transactions for Dish Mart and record any required journal entries.

Note that all sales transactions are with the same customer, Emma Purcell.
Mar. 5

Dish Mart made a cash sale of 13 sets of dishes at a price of $700 per set to customer Emma
Purcell. The cost per set is $460 to Dish Mart.

Mar. 9

Dish Mart sold 23 sets of dishes to Emma for $650 per set on credit, at a cost to Dish Mart of
$435 per set. Terms of the sale are 10/15, n/60, invoice date March 9.

Mar. 13

Emma discovers 8 of the dish sets are damaged from the March 9 sale and returns them to Dish
Mart for a full refund.

Mar. 14

Dish Mart sells 6 sets of dishes to Emma for $670 per set on credit, at a cost to Dish Mart of $450
per set. Terms of the sale are 10/10, n/60, invoice date March 14.

Mar. 15

Emma discovers that 3 of the dish sets from the March 14 purchase and 7 of the dish sets from
the March 5 sale are missing a few dishes but keeps them since Dish Mart granted an allowance
of $200 per set for all 10 dish sets. Dish Mart and Emma have agreed to reduce the amount Dish
Mart has outstanding instead of sending a separate check for the March 5 allowance in cash.

Mar. 24

Emma Purcell pays her account in full for all outstanding purchases, less any returns,
allowances, and/or discounts.

Problem Set B

B

PB1.
A.

6.1 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Furniture Warehouse.
July 5: Purchased 30 couches at a cost of $150 each from a manufacturer. Credit terms are 2/15, n/30,
invoice date July 5.

B.

July 10: Furniture Warehouse returned 5 couches for a full refund.

C.

July 15: Furniture Warehouse found 6 defective couches, but kept the merchandise for an allowance of
$500.

D.
PB2.
A.

July 20: Furniture Warehouse paid their account in full with cash.
6.1 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Mason Suppliers.
Sep. 8: Purchased 50 deluxe hammers at a cost of $95 each from a manufacturer. Credit terms are 5/
20, n/60, invoice date September 8.

B.

Sep. 12: Mason Suppliers returned 8 hammers for a full refund.

C.

Sep. 16: Mason Suppliers found 4 defective hammers, but kept the merchandise for an allowance of
$250.

D.

Sep. 28: Mason Suppliers paid their account in full with cash.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

PB3.

443

6.2 Costume Warehouse sells costumes and accessories and purchases their merchandise from a

manufacturer. Review the following transactions and prepare the journal entry or entries if Costume
Warehouse uses
A.

the perpetual inventory system

B.

the periodic inventory system

Jun. 4

Costume Warehouse purchases 88 costumes on credit at a purchase price of $15 per costume.
The terms of the purchase are 5/15, n/30, with an invoice date of June 4.

Jun. 12

Costume Warehouse returns 20 costumes to the manufacturer for a full refund.

Jun. 19

Costume Warehouse pays in full for the remaining costumes, less the return.

PB4.

6.2 Pharmaceutical Supplies sells medical supplies and purchases their merchandise from a

manufacturer. Review the following transactions and prepare the journal entry or entries if Pharmaceutical
Supplies uses
A.

the perpetual inventory system

B.

the periodic inventory system

Apr. 7

Pharmaceutical Supplies purchases 50 medical stands on credit at a purchase price of $15 per
stand. The terms of the purchase are 5/10, n/45, with an invoice date of April 7.

Apr. 11

Pharmaceutical Supplies returns 18 stands to the manufacturer for a full refund.

Apr. 17

Pharmaceutical Supplies pays in full for the remaining stands, less the return.

PB5.

6.3 Review the following transactions for April Anglers and record any required journal entries.

Oct. 4

April Anglers purchases 82 fishing poles at $33 each with cash.

Oct. 5

April Anglers purchases 116 fishing poles at $30 each on credit. Terms of the purchase are 3/15,
n/30, invoice date October 5.

Oct. 12

April discovers 18 of the fishing poles are damaged from the October 4 purchase and returns
them to the supplier for a full refund. April also discovers that 32 of the fishing poles from the
October 5 purchase are the wrong length but keeps them since the supplier granted an
allowance of $15 per fishing pole.

Oct. 24

April pays their account in full from the October 5 purchase, less any returns, allowances, and/or
discounts.

444

PB6.

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

6.3 Review the following transactions for Dish Mart and record any required journal entries. Note that

all purchase transactions are with the same supplier.
Nov. 5

Dish Mart purchases 45 sets of cutlery for $100 per set with cash.

Nov. 9

Dish Mart purchases 50 sets of cutlery for $120 per set on credit. Terms of the purchase are 5/
15, n/60, invoice date November 9.

Nov. 13

Dish Mart discovers 15 of the cutlery sets are damaged from the November 9 purchase and
returns them to the supplier for a full refund.

Nov. 14

Dish Mart purchases 30 sets of cutlery for $130 per set on credit. Terms of the purchase are 5/
10, n/60, invoice date November 14.

Nov. 15

Dish Mart discovers that 10 of the cutlery sets from the November 14 purchase and 20 of the
cutlery sets from the November 5 purchase are missing a few spoons but keeps them since the
supplier granted an allowance of $30 per set for the November 14 cutlery sets and $35 per set
for the November 5 cutlery sets. Dish Mart and the supplier have agreed to reduce the amount
of debt Dish Mart has outstanding instead of sending a separate check for the November 5
allowance in cash.

Nov. 24

Dish Mart pays their account in full for all outstanding purchases, less any returns, allowances,
and/or discounts.

PB7.

6.4 Review the following sales transactions for April Anglers and record any required journal entries.

Oct. 4

April Anglers made a cash sale of 40 fishing poles to customer Billie Dyer at a price of $55 per
pole. The cost to April is $33 per pole.

Oct. 5

April Anglers sells 24 fishing poles to customer Billie Dyer at a price of $52 per pole on credit. The
cost to April is $30 per pole. Terms of the sale are 2/10, n/30, invoice date October 5.

Oct. 12

Billie returns seven of the fishing poles from the October 4 purchase to April Anglers for a full
refund. April returns these poles to their inventory at the original cost per pole. Billie also
discovers that 6 of the fishing poles from the October 5 purchase are the wrong color but keeps
them since April granted an allowance of $18 per fishing pole.

Oct. 24

April pays their account in full from the October 5 purchase, less any returns, allowances, and/or
discounts.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

PB8.

445

6.4 Review the following sales transactions for Dish Mart and record any required journal entries. Note

that all sales transactions are with the same customer, Bella Davies.
Apr. 5

Dish Mart made a cash sale of 22 sets of cutlery to Bella Davies for $330 per set. The cost per set
to Dish Mart is $125 per set.

Apr. 9

Dish Mart sells 14 sets of cutlery to Bella Davies on credit for $345 per set. The cost per set to
Dish Mart is $120 per set. Terms of the sale are 2/15, n/60, invoice date April 9.

Apr. 13

Bella returns nine of the cutlery sets from the April 9 sale to Dish Mart for a full refund. Dish Mart
restores the cutlery to its inventory at the original cost of $120 per set.

Apr. 14

Bella purchases 18 sets of cutlery for $275 per set on credit, at a cost to Dish Mart of $124 per
set. Terms of the sale are 2/10, n/60, invoice date April 14.

Apr. 15

Bella discovers that 5 of the cutlery sets from the April 14 purchase and 10 of the cutlery sets
from the April 5 purchase are missing a few spoons but keeps them since Dish Mart granted an
allowance of $175 per set for all dish sets. Dish Mart and Bella have agreed to reduce the
amount Bella has outstanding instead of sending a separate check for the April 5 allowance in
cash.

Apr. 28

Bella Davies pays her account in full for all outstanding purchases, less any returns, allowances,
and/or discounts.

PB9.

6.5 Record the following purchase transactions of Custom Kitchens Inc.

Oct. 6

Purchased 230 cabinet doors on credit at a cost of $46 per door. Shipping charges are an extra
$2 cash per door and are not subject to discount. Terms of the purchase are 5/15, n/35, FOB
Shipping Point, invoice dated October 6.

Oct. 9

Purchased 100 cabinet doors with cash at cost of $40 per door. Shipping charges are an extra
$3.25 cash per door and are not subject to discount. Terms of the purchase are FOB Destination.

Oct. 20
PB10.
Apr. 4

Custom Kitchens Inc. pays in full for their purchase from October 6.
6.5 Record the following sales transactions of Money Office Supplies.
Made a cash sale to a customer for 15 chairs at a sales price of $80 per chair. The cost to Money
Office Supplies is $55 per chair. Shipping charges are an extra $4 cash per chair and are not
subject to discount. Terms of the sale are FOB Shipping Point.

Apr. 9

Sold 20 chairs on credit for $85 per chair to a customer. The cost per chair to Money Office
Supplies is $50 per chair. Shipping charges are an extra $4.50 cash per chair and are not subject
to discount. Terms of the sale are 3/10, n/30, FOB Destination, invoice dated April 9.

Apr. 19

The customer pays in full for their purchase on April 9.

446

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

PB11.

6.5 Record the following sales transactions of Custom Kitchens Inc.

Nov. 12

Made a cash sale to a customer for 34 cabinet doors at a sales price of $72 per door. The cost to
Custom Kitchens Inc. is $46 per door. Shipping charges are an extra $3.15 cash per door and are
not subject to discount. Terms of the sale are FOB Shipping Point.

Nov. 16

Sold 22 doors on credit for $80 per door to a customer. The cost per door to Custom Kitchens
Inc. is $40 per door. Shipping charges are an extra $4.00 cash per door and are not subject to
discount. Terms of the sale are 5/15, n/40, FOB Destination, invoice dated November 12.

Nov. 24
PB12.

The customer pays in full for their purchase on November 16.
6.6 The following is the adjusted trial balance data for Elm Connections as of December 31, 2019.

A.

Use the data provided to compute net sales for 2019.

B.

Compute the gross margin for 2019.

C.

Compute the gross profit margin ratio (rounded to nearest hundredth)

D.

Prepare a simple income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

E.

Prepare a multi-step income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

PB13.

447

6.6 Following is the adjusted trial balance data for Garage Parts Unlimited as of December 31, 2019.

A.

Use the data provided to compute net sales for 2019.

B.

Compute the gross margin or 2019.

C.

Compute the gross profit margin ratio (rounded to nearest hundredth)

D.

Prepare a simple income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

E.

Prepare a multi-step income statement for the year ended December 31, 2019.

PB14.

6.7 Review the following transactions for April Anglers and record any required journal entries.

Oct. 4

April Anglers purchases 82 fishing poles at $33 each with cash.

Oct. 5

April Anglers purchases 116 fishing poles at $30 each on credit. Terms of the purchase are 3/15,
n/30, invoice date October 5.

Oct. 12

April discovers 18 of the fishing poles are damaged from the October 4 purchase and returns
them to the supplier for a full refund. April also discovers that 32 of the fishing poles from the
October 5 purchase are the wrong length but keeps them since the supplier granted an
allowance of $15 per fishing pole.

Oct. 24

April pays their account in full from the October 5 purchase, less any returns, allowances, and/or
discounts.

448

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

PB15.

6.7 Review the following sales transactions for Dish Mart and record any required journal entries.

Note that all sales transactions are with the same customer, Bella Davies.
Apr. 5

Dish Mart made a cash sale of 22 sets of cutlery to Bella Davies for $330 per set. The cost per set
to Dish Mart is $125 per set.

Apr. 9

Dish Mart sells 14 sets of cutlery to Bella Davies on credit for $345 per set, with a cost to Dish
Mart of $120 per set. Terms of the sale are 2/15, n/60, invoice date April 9.

Apr. 13

Bella discovers 9 of the cutlery sets are damaged from the April 9 sale and returns them to Dish
Mart for a full refund.

Apr. 14

Bella purchases 18 sets of cutlery for $275 per set on credit, at a cost to Dish Mart of $124 per
set. Terms of the sale are 2/10, n/60, invoice date April 14.

Apr. 15

Bella discovers that 5 of the cutlery sets from the April 14 purchase and 10 of the cutlery sets
from the April 5 purchase are missing a few spoons but keeps them since Dish Mart granted an
allowance of $175 per set for all dish sets. Dish Mart and Bella have agreed to reduce the
amount Bella has outstanding instead of sending a separate check for the April 5 allowance in
cash.

Apr. 28

Bella Davies pays her account in full for all outstanding purchases, less any returns, allowances,
and/or discounts.

Thought Provokers
TP1.

6.1 Conduct research on a real-world retailer’s trade discounts and policies, and discuss the following

questions.
• Which company did you choose? What do they sell?
• What is a trade discount?
• What products are subject to a trade discount?
• Describe the discount terms/program in detail. Give examples.
• Are there any restrictions?
• What incentive does this company have to give a trade discount?
• How does this discount benefit the buyer?
• If the buyer had to choose between receiving a trade discount or regular cash purchase discount,
which would benefit them more? Why?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

TP2.

449

6.2 You have decided to open up a small convenience store in your hometown. As part of the initial

set-up process, you need to determine whether to use a perpetual inventory system or a periodic inventory
system. Write an evaluation paper comparing the perpetual and periodic inventory systems. Describe the
benefits and challenges of each system as it relates to your industry and to your business size. Compare at
least one example transaction using the perpetual and periodic inventory systems (a purchase transaction, for
example). Research and describe the impact each system has on your financial statements. Decide which
system would be the best fit for your business, and support your decision with research.
TP3.

6.5 You own your own outdoor recreation supply store. You are in the process of drafting a standard

invoice agreement for customer sales conducted on credit. Create a sample sales invoice with the following
minimum information listed:
• Your company information
• Date of sale
• Your customer’s information
• An example product you sell with name, description, price per unit, and number of units sold
• Terms of sale including credit terms and shipping charges, with numerical figures for shipping charges
• Any contract language necessary to further establish the terms of sale (for example, warranties,
limitations on shipping, and returns)
Write a reflection about your invoice choice, as it relates to format, terms, contract language, and pricing
strategies. Conduct a comparison study to others in your industry (such as REI) to evaluate your choices. Make
sure to support your decisions with concrete examples and research.
TP4.

6.6 Review the most recent yearly (or quarterly) income statement for a publicly-traded company and

answer the following questions.
• What company did you choose, and which income statement format do they use (multi-step, simple, or
combination)?
• What information is included on the statement?
• Do you agree with the format presentation? Why or why not?
• What are the benefits and limitations with the income statement format choice?
• Compute the Gross Profit Margin Ratio. Discuss the results.
TP5.

6.7 You own a clothing store and use a periodic inventory system. Research like companies in the

clothing industry and answer the following questions.
• Which inventory system is most used in clothing stores, periodic or perpetual?
• Why can periodic inventory reporting be a better approach to use than perpetual inventory reporting
for this type of industry?
• What are some of the advantages and disadvantages to the periodic inventory method?
• What other types of businesses may use the periodic inventory method rather than the perpetual
method?

450

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 6 Merchandising Transactions

7

Accounting Information Systems
Figure 7.1 Accounting Information Systems. Is this the best way to keep up with your business transactions?
No. (credit: modification of “4 months of paperwork to sort” by Joel Bez/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline
7.1 Define and Describe the Components of an Accounting Information System
7.2 Describe and Explain the Purpose of Special Journals and Their Importance to Stakeholders
7.3 Analyze and Journalize Transactions Using Special Journals
7.4 Prepare a Subsidiary Ledger
7.5 Describe Career Paths Open to Individuals with a Joint Education in Accounting and Information
Systems

Why It Matters
Shane was a talented tennis player at his university. He had a hard time finding a job in his field upon
graduation. While he worked toward finding employment, he spent time on a tennis court playing, and parents
began asking if he would give lessons to their kids. Excited for the opportunity and income, he started giving
lessons and kept track of sessions and payments by printing out notes and piling them on his desk. When it
came time to file a tax return, though, he realized that he should have been keeping up with his bookkeeping
all along, either manually in some sort of ledger or electronically on his computer.
Rather quickly, his student pool grew. Some clients paid up front for lessons, others paid after a few lessons
were complete, and still others were not sure if they had paid yet. These various payment methods created a
record-keeping challenge for Shane. With winter coming, Shane was exploring the idea of securing court time
at an indoor facility to continue teaching and knew he would need to consider court time rental costs in his
lesson expenses. Additionally, Shane planned to offer group lessons as well as camps and would need to hire
another coach. As Shane’s impromptu business blossomed, it came with additional sources and types of

452

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

revenues as well as new expenses. He needed a better system to keep track of the financial aspects of his
business.
A friend told him he needed an accounting information system to organize the financial aspects of his
business and to allow him to measure the financial performance of his growing business. But what did Shane’s
friend mean? What is an accounting information system? In this chapter, we explain accounting information
systems, their evolution from paper-based to digital formats, and how a company—whether small like Shane’s
tennis lesson venture or large like a major corporation—uses these systems to stay on top of its finances and
to inform important business decisions.
7.1

Define and Describe the Components of an Accounting Information

System
Today, when we refer to an accounting information system (AIS), we usually mean a computerized
accounting system, because computers and computer software that help us process accounting transactions
have become relatively inexpensive. The benefits of using a computerized accounting system outweigh the
costs of purchasing one, and almost all companies, even very small ones, can afford to and do use a
computerized accounting system. That is not to say that paper-based or manual accounting systems and
processes have disappeared. Most businesses have some form of both noncomputerized and computerized
systems. QuickBooks is an example of a relatively inexpensive accounting software application that is popular
with small and medium-sized businesses.

Manual and Computerized Accounting Information Systems
Interestingly, the term accounting information system predates computers. Technically, an AIS is a system or set
of processes for collecting data about accounting transactions; recording, organizing, and summarizing the
data; and culminating with the preparation of financial statements and other reports for internal and external
users. These systems or processes can exist as a series of paper ledgers, computer databases, or some
combination of the two. Examples of external users include banks that might lend the company money,
investors, and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which requires that publicly traded companies
submit audited financial statements. Since business enterprises needed to produce financial statements long
before computers existed, they used manual accounting systems to gather the data needed. Data is the term
for parts of accounting transactions that constitute the input to an AIS. You have examined many forms of
data in this course, for example, the cash received upon the sale of an item is one data point, the reduction of
the inventory account related to that specific sold item is another data point, and both the revenue and the
cost of goods sold would be additional data points associated with that single transaction of a sale. These data
points are summarized and aggregated (in other words “processed”) into more meaningful and useful
numbers that appear in the financial statements, and all this data is typically referred to as financial
information. A company that may have used a manual AIS years ago likely uses a computerized AIS today. It is
important to remember that a computerized accounting system does not change what we do with accounting
transactions, it only changes how we do it, and how we can present the information to different users.
Let’s consider the example of a company that came into existence before we had computers, the department
store Macy’s, which currently operates stores in nearly all fifty US states. Macy’s began as a small, fancy dry
goods store that opened in New York City in 1858, became a department store, R.H. Macy & Co., in 1877 using
the same red star logo it still uses today. We can assume that even one hundred years ago, Macy’s needed to
perform the same tasks it does today:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

453

• purchase merchandise inventory to sell to customers;
• record returns of some of the inventory;
• record sales made to customers at the sales price;
• record the cost of the goods sold at the amount Macy’s paid to purchase them;
• record payments from customers;
• record returns from customers;
• purchase other kinds of items needed for operations, like office supplies and fixed assets;
• pay for prior purchases;
• pay for rent, utilities, and other services;
• pay employees;
• enter all of these transactions;
• post all transactions;
• record adjusting journal entries;
• record closing journal entries;
• keep track of its receivables, payables, and inventory; and
• produce financial statements for internal and external users as well as other reports useful to managers
in assessing various performance measures needed to evaluate the success of the company.
As you might imagine, doing all this without computers is quite different than performing these tasks with the
aid of computers. In a manual system, each business transaction is recorded, in the form of a journal entry in
the general journal or one of the four common other special journals described in Describe and Explain the
Purpose of Special Journals and Their Importance to Stakeholders, using pen and paper. Journal entries are
then posted to a general ledger; balances would be computed by hand or with an adding machine/calculator
for each general ledger account; a trial balance is prepared; adjusting journal entries are prepared; and finally
financial statements prepared, all manually.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Modernization of Accounting Systems
In 1955, in one of the earliest uses of a true computer to facilitate accounting tasks, General Electric
Company used a UNIVAC computer to process its payroll. Initially it took the computer forty hours just to
process payroll for one pay period. The first modern era spreadsheet software for personal computers,
VisiCalc, became available in 1978. Thus, between these time periods there were minor improvements to
the use of computerized accounting tools, but it was not until the mid-1980s that comprehensive
computerized accounting programs became widely used. Thus, prior to the mid-1980s, much accounting
was done manually or using a variety of less-advanced computer systems in conjunction with manual
systems. Imagine the number of bookkeepers it would take to record the transactions of many
companies. For example, on the first day of business at Macy’s in 1858, the store had revenues of
$11.06.

[1]

The actual accounting ledger used to record those sales is shown in Figure 7.2, which seems

quite simple. Today Macy’s has over $24 billion in sales revenue—can you imagine accounting for all of
those transactions (along with all expenses) by hand?

1 Fraser Sherman. “The History of Computerized Accounting.” Career Trend. January 14, 2019. https://careertrend.com/
about-6328213-history-computerized-accounting.html

454

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Figure 7.2

Macy’s Accounting Ledger. Accounting ledger showing the transactions for Macy’s first day.

Total revenues were $11.06 or a little over $340 in today’s dollars. (credit: used with permission of Macy’s
Corporation)
Today, Macy’s and other large and small companies perform the same accounting tasks using computer
hardware (computers, printers, and keyboards), and software. For example, cashiers can enter
transactions into a computer using a keyboard, scanner, or touch screen. The screen displays the data
entered or fields available for data entry. As an example, most retail stores have a point-of-sale system
(POS) that enters the sale by scanning the item at the point of sale, meaning at the time the transaction
is made. This system records the sale and at the same time updates inventory by reducing it based on
the number of items purchased.

Later in the section on how to Prepare a Subsidiary Ledger, you will be provided with a series of transactions
for a small business and you will be asked to first enter the transactions manually into the appropriate journal,
post the information from the journals to the general ledger, prepare trial balances, adjusting and closing
entries, and manually produce financial statements just as Macy’s or any other business would have done
prior to the use of various computer technologies. You will then perform the same tasks using QuickBooks, a
popular accounting software program used by many small and medium-sized businesses. A company as large
as Macy’s has stores in locations all over the country and a large volume of transactions, so it is more likely to
use a software package designed to meet the needs of a very large business. This is often referred to as an
enterprise resource planning (ERP) system which stands for enterprise resource planning (ERP) system. An
ERP system integrates all of the company’s computerized systems including accounting systems and
nonaccounting systems. That is, large companies have various accounting subsystems such as the revenue
system (sales/accounts receivable/cash receipts), the expenditure system (purchasing/accounts payable/cash
disbursements), the production system, the payroll system, and the general ledger system. Nonaccounting
systems might include research and development, marketing, and human resources, which, while not an

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

455

integral part of the accounting system, in a large companywide ERP system are integrated with the accounting
modules. Examples of popular ERP software systems are PeopleSoft and SAP.
Like many businesses today, Macy’s also maintains a company website and engages in e-commerce by
offering the sale of many company products online. Accounting software companies like QuickBooks and
larger software vendors have upgraded the ways in which they can provide AIS software to meet these needs.
For example, a small local retail shoe store can purchase QuickBooks software provided on an electronic
storage device such as a CD and upload it to be stored on the hard drive of the company’s computers, or the
store can purchase a “cloud” version. The cloud version provides the shoe store purchasing the software with
access to the QuickBooks software online via a user ID and password with no need to load the software on the
store’s computers. QuickBooks updates the software when new versions are released and stores the
company’s accounting data in the cloud. Cloud computing refers to using the internet to access software and
information storage facilities provided by companies rather than, or in addition to, storing this data on the
company’s computer hard drive or in paper form. An advantage of cloud computing is that company
employees can access the software and enter transactions from any device with an internet connection at any
location. The company pays a monthly fee for access to updated software, which can be less costly than buying
software stored on individual computers. Potential disadvantages include security concerns because an
outside company is storing company programs and data, and if the hosting company experiences technical
difficulties, companies paying for these services may temporarily be unable to access their own data or
conduct business. Nevertheless, cloud services are increasingly popular.
Here, we illustrate the concepts and practices of an AIS using Intuit QuickBooks, a popular and widely used
AIS.
While a company typically selects an AIS to suit its specific needs, all systems should have components capable
of:
• inputting/entering data (e.g., entering a sale to a customer);
• storing data;
• processing data and computing additional amounts related to transactions (e.g., computing sales tax on
the sale, as well as shipping costs and insurance fees; computing an employee’s pay by multiplying hours
worked by hourly pay rate; processing inventory changes from both inventory purchases and inventory
sales and data from any other transaction that occurs in the business);
• aggregating/summarizing data (e.g., computing total sales for the year);
• presenting data (e.g., producing a balance sheet and other financial statements and reports for the year);
and
• storing data (such as the customer’s name, address, shipping address, and credit limit).
AISs, whether computerized or manual, generally involve three stages: input, processing, and output. We enter
raw data into our system at the input stage and try to correct any errors prior to going on to the next stage of
processing the data. We ultimately produce “output,” which is in the form of useful information.

Inputting/Entering Data
A source document is the original document that provides evidence that a transaction occurred. If you hire a
company to paint your house, it will most likely provide a document showing how much you owe. That is the
company’s sales document and your invoice. When you pay, your check or digital transaction record is also a
source document for the company that provided the service, in this case, the home painter.

456

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Assume you go into the university bookstore to purchase a school sweatshirt, and it is sold out. You then fill
out a document ordering a size medium sweatshirt in blue. The form you fill out is a purchase order to you,
and it is a sales order to the university bookstore. It is also a source document that provides evidence that you
have ordered the sweatshirt. Assume the bookstore does not ask you to pay in advance because it is not sure
it will be able to obtain the sweatshirt for you. At that point, no sale has been made, and you owe no money to
the bookstore. A few days later, the bookstore manages to acquire the sweatshirt you ordered and sends you
an email notifying you of this. When you return to the bookstore, you are presented with the sweatshirt and an
invoice (also known as a bill) that you must pay in order to take your sweatshirt home. This invoice/bill is also a
source document. It provides evidence of the sale and your obligation to pay that amount. Let’s look at an
example.
Figure 7.3 is a source document—an invoice (bill) from Symmetry Mold Design for mold design services. Note
the terms (agreements about payments) are listed at the top and how the company calculates those outcomes
at the bottom.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Figure 7.3

457

Invoice from Symmetry Mold Design showing payment terms. (credit: modification of "Invoice"

by James Ceszyk/Flickr, CC B 4.0)
Some companies send paper bills in the mail, often asking the recipient to tear off part of the bill and return it
with the payment. This tear-off portion is a turn-around document and helps ensure that the payment is
applied to the correct customer account and invoice. Generally, this document began as printed output, an
invoice, from the billing part of the AIS. When the customer tears off a part of it and returns it in the envelope
with a check to the company, it has now been “turned around” and will be used as an input source document,
called a remittance advice. A remittance advice is a document that customers send along with checks and
informs the recipient as to which invoice the customer is paying for. Figure 7.4 is an example of a turn-around
document.

458

Figure 7.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Turn-Around Document from Kohl’s. The use of automation (bar codes) saves time and ensures

accuracy since a machine can read the address, the account number, and even the amount on the check.
(credit: modification of “Bill” by Kerry Ceszyk/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)
Both manual and computerized accounting systems utilized source documents. E-commerce systems have
some additional source documents related to online transactions. Source documents help to establish an
audit trail, which is a trail of evidence documenting the history of a specific transaction starting from its
inception/source document and showing all the steps it went through until its final disposition. The trail of
source documents and other records (the audit trail) makes it easier to investigate errors or questions by
customers, vendors, employees, and others. For example, when a customer places an order by phone, by mail,
or online, the sales order becomes the source document. If the customer does not receive the product
ordered, the company can locate the original order, see if a picking ticket was generated (a picking ticket tells
warehouse employees what inventory items the customer ordered, that now need to be picked off the shelf),
locate the shipping documents, which provide evidence that the product was given to the shipper, and check
for customer signature confirming receipt of goods. The trail of documents and entries in journals and ledgers
and their electronic equivalent generated by this transaction provides evidence of all the steps that took place
along the way. This makes it easy for anyone to verify or investigate, and perhaps find the weak links, where
the process may have broken down. It allows the company to identify the reason why the customer never
received the goods ordered. Maybe the order was never shipped because the company was out of stock of this
specific product, maybe it was shipped and left at the customer’s doorstep with no signature requested, or
maybe the order was shipped to the wrong customer or to an incorrect address. An audit trail will help
company personnel investigate any of these common issues. It should also help them identify weaknesses in
their processes and precipitate improvements.
Businesses need a way to input data from the source document such as a sales invoice or purchase order. This
was previously done with pen and paper and is currently done by keying it in on a computer keyboard;
scanning, with a scanner such as one that reads MICR (magnetic ink character recognition) symbols (found on
bank checks) or POS system scanners at cash registers that scan product bar codes/UPC symbols; or receiving

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

459

it by e-transmission (or electronic funds transfer [EFT]). Input often involves the use of hardware such as
scanners, keypads, keyboards, touch screens, or fingerprint readers called biometric devices. Once data has
been input, it must be processed in order to be useful.

Processing Data
Companies need the accounting system to process the data that has been entered and transform it into useful
information. In manual accounting systems, employees process all transaction data by journalizing, posting,
and creating financial reports using paper. However, as technology has advanced, it became easier to keep
records by using computers with software programs specifically developed for accounting transactions.
Computers are good at repetition and calculations, both of which are involved in accounting, and computers
can perform these calculations and analyses more quickly, and with fewer errors, thus making them a very
effective tool for accounting from both an input and an output standpoint.

LINK TO LEARNING
See a list of popular bookkeeping software (https://openstax.org/l/50AcctSW) packages. With this
information, potential options for sample accounting software options can be evaluated.

Output: Presenting Information
An AIS should provide a way to present system output (printed page, screen image, e-transmission). Any
accounting software application such as that used by large companies (an ERP system) or one used by smaller
businesses (QuickBooks) can easily print financial statements and other documents as well as display them on
the screen.
Some financial information must be provided to other sources such as banks or government agencies, and
though in past decades everything was presented and submitted on paper, today, most of this information is
submitted electronically, and AISs help facilitate having the information in the necessary electronic format.
Many banks require electronic data, and the Internal Revenue System (IRS) accepts your information as a
digital transmission instead of a paper form. In 2017, 92 percent of all taxpayers who filed their own taxes did
so electronically.

[2]

Most corporations choose to file their taxes electronically, and those with assets over $10

million are required to file electronically with the IRS.

[3]

Since May 5, 1996, all publicly traded companies are

required to submit their filings, such as financial statements and stock offerings, to the SEC electronically.

[4]

The SEC places all the data into an electronic database known as the Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and
Retrieval System (EDGAR). This database allows anyone to search the database for financial and other
information about any publicly traded company. Thus, AISs facilitate not only internal access to financial
information, but the sharing of that information externally as needed or required. Just as the EDGAR system
used by the SEC stores data for retrieval, an AIS must provide a way to store and retrieve data.

2 Income Tax Return Statistics. eFile. May 2018. https://www.efile.com/efile-tax-return-direct-deposit-statistics/
3 Income Tax Return Statistics. eFile. May 2018. https://www.efile.com/efile-tax-return-direct-deposit-statistics/
4 There is a hardship exemption for companies that cannot file their documents electronically. See U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Important Information about EDGAR. February 16, 2010. https://www.sec.gov/edgar/aboutedgar.htm

460

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Storing Data
Data can be stored by an AIS in paper, digital, or cloud formats. Before computers were widely used, financial
data was stored on paper, like the journal and ledger shown in Figure 7.5.

Figure 7.5

Data Storage. (a) General journal and (b) general ledger. (credit a: modification of “Entry in

Barent Roseboom’s ledger detailing transactions with John Fluno in 1764” by National Park Service, Public
Domain; credit b: modification of “Print Order Book, Holmes McDougall” by Edinburgh City of Print/Flickr, CC
BY 2.0)
As technology has evolved, so have storage systems—from floppy disks to CDs, thumb drives, and the cloud.
The hard drive on your computer is a data storage device, as is an external hard drive you can purchase. Data
that is stored must have the ability to be retrieved when needed. As you can see from Figure 7.6, stored data
comes from and/or flows through the three main functions of an AIS (input, processes, and output) with the
end result being the use of the data in forms needed for decision-making, such as financial statements. Access
to the ability to input data, manage processes, or retrieve data requires adequate controls to prevent fraud or
unauthorized access and requires the implementation of data security measures. Figure 7.6 illustrates the key
functions performed by an AIS.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Figure 7.6

461

Accounting Information System. The four key functions performed by an accounting information

system. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

YOUR TURN
The Steps in an Accounting Information System
The three steps of an accounting information system are input, processing, and output. Data is the raw
ingredient used in these processes. Some of the data may be obtained from a source document, and
other data is obtained from the database where it had previously been stored. When the data has been
processed, the final result is usually information. Information is more useful than data. Take, for
example, another process that a bakery might use to bake chocolate chip cookies. While computers
might not necessarily need to be involved, we begin the process by assembling a bunch of raw
ingredients such as eggs, sugar, flour, chocolate chips, and oil, in a large bowl. Taking a spoonful of what
is in the bowl at the time is not very pleasing to the taste buds or “useful” to someone craving a
chocolate chip cookie. We process the raw ingredients by mixing them well and turning them into dough,
cutting them into shapes, baking them, and glazing them. Similarly, raw data about a single sale
contained on the sales invoice, such as customer name, date of sale, and amount of sale, is individually
not very useful to a financial statement user such as an investor. However, by processing the data related
to the sale, making sure it is correct by checking that the number of items ordered were in stock and
actually shipped, aggregating it with other sales for the period, and producing an income statement
containing the sales for the period is substantially more useful than the individual pieces of data relating
to a single sale.
Can you give an example of each of the three steps, as well as a source document that might be used in
the input stage and stored data that might be used in the input and processing stages, first for a grocery
store, and then a medical office?

462

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Solution
Grocery store:
• Source Document: This would include a check to be deposited; totals from each cash register,
including total cash; an invoice for produce; an application for employment by a potential new
employee; time card information; a W-4 form (employment information); and so on.
• Input: This includes entering the data from the source document on the computer keyboard,
electronically scanning the bar code of each product purchased at the grocery store (at checkout
counter and to receive goods from vendor off the truck), maybe fingerprinting at the time clock, or
keying in a price on the register.
• Processing: A cash register processes (accumulates and totals) different categories of items
(coupons, checks, and charges) by the user; inventory can be tracked by RFID (radio-frequency
identification); and software programs can process information gathered by individual cash
registers as well as employee information.
• Output: Data that has been processed can be viewed on a computer screen, printed as a hard copy
(paper output), or sent as electronic output from the cash register to the computer (can be done
wirelessly or with a cable).
• Storage: Data can be stored in the company database on its computer hard drive or as cloud
storage. Hopefully the store is also paying for safe backup storage offsite (in case of fire at the store
or hackers attempting to obtain information), generally accessed through the internet and stored in
“the cloud.” Otherwise, storage can be on paper printouts, the computer hard drive, disks, or
external drives. The data that is stored may be retrieved and used at the input, processing, and
output stages.
Doctor’s office:
• Source Document: This includes a check to be deposited from the patient; the patient’s insurance
information on file; a doctor’s record of the diagnosis and procedures performed on the patient, to
be submitted to the insurance company; and an invoice for medical supplies.
• Input: Data from the source document, for example, containing the diagnosis and a treatment plan,
would be entered on the computer keyboard.
• Processing: The system might retrieve the treatment codes corresponding to every procedure the
doctor performed, so it contains the appropriate information for the insurance company.
• Output: The treatment form is printed and then mailed to the insurance company for payment.
• Storage: The diagnosis and treatment plan are stored on the computer database for retrieval on the
next visit for this patient. The form to be sent to the insurance company is also stored electronically
so there can be follow-up until the payment from the insurance company is received. Also note that
during processing, the system had to retrieve the treatment codes from a file of all of the codes that
was stored in the database.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

463

YOUR TURN
The Accounting Information System (AIS)
What are some of the types of information the accounting information system should be able to provide
to the owners, managers, and employees of business, at the end of the day, or week, or month, which
they in turn may need to provide to other external users?
Solution
• Information for internal purposes will include total sales and how much it cost to generate the sales.
Also considered is how much inventory is on hand so a decision can be made as to whether or not to
order more inventory.
• The company will need to record all of the economic events of the business in order to find total
sales, cost of goods sold, expenses, and net income, as well as the number of hours employees
worked, the employee’s social security number, and how much the company promised to pay the
employee per hour.
• Information for external users, such as the IRS or state and local government agencies, would
include income tax returns and sales and payroll tax forms. The business owners and managers will
need all sales and expenses, sales tax collected, and employees’ earnings.
• In other words, the company needs an AIS.

While an AIS has the primary functions of input, processing, output, and storage, each company or system will
decide on the exact steps and processes under each of these broad functions. We know that data is used to
create the types of information needed by users to make decisions. One way in which a retail organization may
obtain, input, process, and store data related to a sales transaction is through a point-of-sale system (POS).
When a customer is ready to buy an item, the cashier scans the product being purchased, the price is retrieved
from the price file, the sale is recorded, and inventory is updated. Most POS systems include a scanner, a
computer screen, or a tablet with a touch screen. Customer payments are stored in the cash drawer. For
noncash sales, credit card readers allow customers to insert, swipe, or tap their cards to pay (which also helps
prevent keyboard input errors and keeps the information safer).

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Ethical Standards in Retail Stores
Professional sales employees operate the POS systems. There is an ethical code for sales professionals
created by the Association of Professional Sales to help sales professionals maintain good judgment.

[5]

The organization sets forth standards such as the following:
• Maintain the highest standards of integrity in all business relationships.
• Provide our customers with a buying experience in which we “do the right thing and thereby help
get the right results.”
• Promote and protect good sales practices.

464

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

• Always act in line with my organization’s codes and within the law.
Accountants can assist sales professionals in creating an ethical environment. The ethical environment
will permit the users of accounting data to make solid business decisions and to better operate a
company.

However, the POS is just part of the AIS. As each sale is entered into the register, other data is collected,
recorded, and processed by the AIS and becomes information. Data about each sale is recorded in the
information system: what was sold, how much it cost, the sales price, and any sales tax. It also records the
time of day, the clerk, and anything else the company programmed the cash register to record. When all the
sales for the day are totaled, it provides information in the form of organized and processed data with
meaning to the company. A business might want to see which hour of the day resulted in the most sales, or to
know which product was the best seller. An AIS can provide this information.
A system is created when processes work together to generate information for the business. The sales process
accesses customers, accounts receivable, and inventory data and updates the appropriate files. The purchases
process also accesses inventory and accounts payable and updates them, because most companies buy goods
on credit. Since no two companies operate exactly the same way, you would expect each company to have a
slightly different AIS. Some businesses do not have a cash register, but they will still have a Sales account.
Some companies only have cash sales, so they would not have an Accounts Receivable account. Regardless of
the type of business—retail, manufacturing, or service—an AIS is an important component of the business as
it is this system that provides the information needed by internal and external decision-makers.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Is This an Accounting Information System?
Do you think your average food truck proprietor has an accounting information system?

Figure 7.7

Food Truck. (credit: modification of “Food Trucks” by Daniel Lobo/Flickr, Public Domain)

5 Association of Professional Sales. “APS Sales Code of Conduct.” n.d. https://www.associationofprofessionalsales.com/professionaldevelopment/sales-code-conduct-aps-ethical-professional/aps-sales-code-conduct/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Food trucks will have some type of accounting information system whether paper based or electronic.
One common method of creating an accounting information system in this type of business environment
is to use an app, such as Square Point of Sale (Square Inc.). The Square Point of Sale (POS) software
system keeps track of the sales. With this type of system, a food truck will likely have a Square Stand (a
tablet-based POS), a cash drawer, and printers. The information input into the Square Stand is stored on
Square servers using the cloud (online storage space offered by different companies and products) and
is accessible by the company via an online dashboard. This system allows the handling of both cash sales
and credit card sales. These components—the Square Point of Sale software, the Square Stand, cash
drawer, and the printers—make up part of the accounting information system for a food truck.

IFRS CONNECTION
Accounting Information Systems in an International Business Environment
All companies, regardless of whether they are domestic or international, will have an accounting
information system with the features described in this chapter. It would be easy to assume that the
accounting information systems created by public companies in the United States are created based on
US generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). This implies that these companies design their
processes and controls so that in addition to meeting the reporting and monitoring goals of the
company, the system also collects, measures, and reports the information that is required under US
GAAP. But is this true? What about companies that have subsidiaries or a portion of their operations in
another country? Do purely international companies use accounting information systems similar to their
US counterparts?
As previously indicated, all companies will create some sort of accounting information system. General
Electric (GE), as a US-based manufacturer, uses an accounting information system that allows it to
record, collect, produce, and analyze the operations of its various businesses. Since GE is a US
corporation, headquartered in Boston, Massachusetts, its accounting information system is designed
around the rules set out by US GAAP. Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) is headquartered in the United
Kingdom, and it designs its accounting information system to produce financials under International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). On the surface, it looks as though each company will create an
information system based on the accounting rules in its own home country. However, it is not quite that
simple. Today, companies take advantage of the ability to borrow money across borders. The lenders
often require the financial statements of the borrower to be presented using the accounting rules
required by the lender’s country. For example, if GE wanted to borrow money from the Royal Bank of
Scotland, it would likely have to present its financial statements based on IFRS rules. Similarly, if FCA
wanted to borrow from Citibank, it would need its financial statements in US GAAP form.
Borrowing is not the only reason a company may need to present financial statements based on a
different set of accounting principles. As of 2017, GE had over 130 subsidiaries, and these businesses
were located across 130 countries. A subsidiary is a business over which the parent company has
decision-making control, usually indicated by an ownership interest of more than 50 percent. Many of
these GE subsidiaries established their accounting information systems based on the accepted

465

466

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

accounting principles in the countries in which they were located, as required in order to be in
compliance with local regulations such as for local taxes. Thus, GE must convert the financial information
obtained from the subsidiary’s accounting information system, often based on IFRS, to US GAAP in order
to consolidate the transactions and operations of all of the subsidiaries with those of the parent
company to create one set of financial statements.
We have basically become a two GAAP world—IFRS and US GAAP—and many companies will find it
necessary to have accounting information systems that can handle both sets of rules due to the global
nature of business and the global nature of raising money through borrowing and issuing stock. This
may seem crazy, to have two systems, but a little over ten years ago there were more than seventy
different GAAP. Today, since many countries now use IFRS, the quality and consistency of financial
reporting have improved. As a result, the cost associated with having accounting information systems
that can combine many different sets of accounting rules has decreased.

7.2

Describe and Explain the Purpose of Special Journals and Their

Importance to Stakeholders
The larger the business, the greater the likelihood that that business will have a large volume of transactions
that need to be recorded in and processed by the company’s accounting information system. You’ve learned
that each transaction is recorded in the general journal, which is a chronological listing of transactions. In
other words, transactions are recorded into the general journal as they occur. While this is correct accounting
methodology, it also can create a cumbersome general journal with which to work and may make finding
specific pieces of information very challenging. For example, assume customer John Smith charged an item for
$100 on June 1. In the general journal, the company would record the following.

This journal entry would be followed by a journal entry for every other transaction the company had for the
remainder of the period. Suppose, on June 27, Mr. Smith asked, “How much do I owe?” To answer this
question, the company would need to review all of the pages of the general journal for nearly an entire month
to find all of the sales transactions relating to Mr. Smith. And if Mr. Smith said, “I thought I paid part of that
two weeks ago,” the company would have to go through the general journal to find all payment entries for Mr.
Smith. Imagine if there were 1,000 similar credit sales transactions for the month, each one would be written
in the general journal in a similar fashion, and all other transactions, such as the paying of bills, or the buying
of inventory, would also be recorded, in chronological order, in the general journal. Thus, recording all
transactions to the general journal makes it difficult to find the particular tidbits of information that are
needed for one of our customers, Mr. Smith. The use of special journal and subsidiary ledgers can make the
accounting information system more effective and allow for certain types of information to be obtained more
easily.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

YOUR TURN
Using General Ledger (Control) Accounts
Here is the information from the accounts payable subsidiary ledger:

What should the total be in the Accounts Payable Control Total?
Here is the information from the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger.

467

468

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

What should the total be in the Accounts Receivable Control Total?
Solution
Accounts Payable Control Total is: 1,362 + 4,468 + 8,167 = 13,997
Accounts Receivable Control Total is: 2,250 + 0 + 1,500 + 8,160 = 11,910

Special Journals
Instead of having just one general journal, companies group transactions of the same kind together and
record them in special journals rather than in the general journal. This makes it easier and more efficient to
find a specific type of transaction and speeds up the process of posting these transactions. In each special
journal, all transactions are totaled at the end of the month, and these totals are posted to the general ledger.
In addition, instead of one person entering all of the transactions in all of the journals, companies often assign

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

469

a given special journal’s entries to one person. The relationship between the special journals, the general
journal, and the general ledger can be seen in Figure 7.8.

Figure 7.8

Special and General. Transaction summaries form the special journals, and all transactions in the

general journal are posted to the general ledger. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Most companies have four special journals, but there can be more depending on the business needs. The four
main special journals are the sales journal, purchases journal, cash disbursements journal, and cash
receipts journal. These special journals were designed because some journal entries occur repeatedly. For
example, selling goods for cash is always a debit to Cash and a credit to Sales recorded in the cash receipts
journal. Likewise, we would record a sale of goods on credit in the sales journal, as a debit to accounts
receivable and a credit to sales. Companies using a perpetual inventory system also record a second entry for
a sale with a debit to cost of goods sold and a credit to inventory. You can see sample entries in Figure 7.9.

Figure 7.9

Sales Journal. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Note there is a column to enter the date the transaction took place; a column to indicate the customer to
whom the transaction pertains; an invoice number that should match the number on the invoice given (in
paper or electronically) to the customer; a reference box that indicates the transaction has been posted to the
customer’s account and can include something as simple as a check mark or a code that links the transaction
to other journals and ledgers; and the last two columns that indicate the accounts and amounts debited and
credited.
Purchases of inventory on credit would be recorded in the purchases journal (Figure 7.10) with a debit to
Merchandise Inventory and a credit to Accounts Payable.

470

Figure 7.10

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Purchases Journal. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)
Paying bills is recorded in the cash disbursements journal (Figure 7.11) and is always a debit to Accounts
Payable (or another payable or expense) and a credit to Cash.

Figure 7.11

Cash Disbursements Journal. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-

SA 4.0 license)
The receipt of cash from the sale of goods, as payment on accounts receivable or from other transactions, is
recorded in a cash receipts journal (Figure 7.12) with a debit to cash and a credit to the source of the cash,
whether that is from sales revenue, payment on an account receivable, or some other account.

Figure 7.12

Cash Receipts Journal. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)
Table 7.1 summarizes the typical transactions in the special journals previously illustrated.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

471

Types and Purposes of Special Journals
Journal Name
Sales Journal

Journal Purpose
Sales on credit

Account(s) Debited
Accounts Receivable,

Account(s) Credited
Sales, Inventory

Cost of Goods Sold
Purchases

Purchases on credit

Inventory

Accounts Payable

Paying cash

Could be:

Cash

Journal
Cash
Disbursements

Accounts Payable, or

Journal

other accounts

Cash Receipts

Receiving cash

Cash

Journal

Could be:
Sales, Accounts
Receivable, or other
accounts

General

Any transaction not covered

Could be:

Could be:

Journal

previously; adjusting and closing

Depreciation

Accumulated

entries

Expense

Depreciation

Table 7.1
How will you remember all of this? Remember, “Cash Is King,” so we consider cash transactions first. If you
receive cash, regardless of the source of the transaction, and even if it is only a part of the transaction, it goes
in the cash receipts journal. For example, if the company made a sale for $1,000 and the customer gave $300 in
cash and promised to pay the remaining balance in the future, the entire transaction would go into the cash
receipts journal, because some cash was received, even if it was only part of a transaction. You could not split
this journal entry between two journals, because each transaction’s debits must equal the credits or else your
journal totals will not balance at the end of the month. You might consider splitting this transaction into two
separate transactions and considering it a cash sale for $300 and a sale on account for $700, but that would
also be inappropriate. Although the balances in the general ledger accounts would technically be correct if you
did that, this is not the right approach. Good internal control dictates that this is a single transaction,
associated with one invoice number on a given date, and should be recorded in its entirety in a single journal,
which in this case is the cash receipts journal. If any cash is received, even if it is only a part of the transaction,
the entire transaction is entered in the cash receipts journal. For this example, the transaction entered in the
cash receipts journal would have a debit to cash for $300, a debit to Accounts Receivable for $700, and a credit
to Sales for $1,000.
If you pay cash (usually by writing a check), for any reason, even if it is only a part of the transaction, the entire
transaction is recorded in the cash disbursements journal. For example, if the company purchased a building
for $500,000 and gave a check for $100,000 as a down payment, the entire transaction would be recorded in
the cash disbursements journal as a credit to cash for $100,000, a credit to mortgage payable for $400,000, and
a debit to buildings for $500,000.
If the transaction does not involve cash, it will be recorded in one of the other special journals. If it is a credit
sale (also known as a sale on account), it is recorded in the sales journal. If it is a credit purchase (also known

472

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

as a purchase on account), it is recorded in the purchases journal. If it is none of the above, it is recorded in the
general journal.

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Accounting Information Systems
Let’s consider what Gearhead Outfitters’ accounting information system might look like. What
information will company management find important? Likewise, what information might external users
of Gearhead’s financial reports need? Do regulatory requirements dictate what Gearhead needs to track
in its accounting system?
Gearhead will want to know its financial position, results of operations, and cash flows. Such data will
help management make decisions about the company. Likewise, external users want this data (balance
sheet, income statement, and statement of cash flows) to make decisions such as whether or not to
extend credit to Gearhead.
To keep accurate records, company operations must be considered. For example, inventory is purchased,
sales are made, customers are billed, cash is collected, employees work and need to be paid, and other
expenses are incurred. All of these operations involve different recording processes. Inventory will
require a purchases journal. Sales will require a sales journal, cash receipts journal, and accounts
receivable subsidiary ledger (discussed later) journal. Payroll and other disbursements will require their
own journals to accurately track transactions.
Such journals allow a company to record accounting information and generate financial statements. The
data also provides management with the information needed to make sound business decisions. For
example, subsidiary ledgers, such as the accounts receivable ledger, provide data about the aging and
collectability of receivables. Thus, the proper design, implementation, and maintenance of the
accounting information system are vital to a company’s sustainability.
What other questions can be answered through the analysis of information gathered by the accounting
information system? Think in terms of the timing of inventory orders and cash flow needs. Is there
nonfinancial information to extract from the accounting system? An accounting information system
should provide the information needed for a business to meet its goals.

Subsidiary Ledgers
In addition to the four special journals, there are two special ledgers, the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger
and the accounts payable subsidiary ledger. The accounts receivable subsidiary ledger gives details about
each person who owes the company money, as shown in Figure 7.13. Each colored block represents an
individual’s account and shows only the amount that person owes the company. Notice that the subsidiary
ledger provides the date of the transaction and a reference column to link the transaction to the same
information posted in one of the special journals (or general journal if special journals are not used)—this
reference is usually a code that references the special journal such as SJ for the sales special journal, as well as
the amounts owed in the debit column and the payments made in the credit column. The amounts owed by all
of the individuals, as indicated in the subsidiary ledger, are added together to form the accounts receivable

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

473

control total, and this should equal the Accounts Receivable balance reported in the general ledger as shown
in Figure 7.14. Key points about the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger are:
• Accounts Receivable in the general ledger is the total of all of the individual account totals that are listed
in the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger.
• All of the amounts owed to the company in the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger must equal the
amounts in the accounts receivable general ledger account.

Figure 7.13

Accounts Receivable Subsidiary Ledger. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Figure 7.14

Accounts Receivable. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Subsidiary Ledger Fraud[6]
Subsidiary ledgers have to balance and agree with the general ledger. Accountants using QuickBooks
and other accounting systems may not have to perform this step, because in these systems the
subsidiary ledger updates the general ledger automatically. However, a dishonest person might
manipulate accounting records by recording a smaller amount of cash receipts in the control account
than is recorded on the subsidiary ledger cards. The ethical accountant must be vigilant to ensure that
the ledgers remain balanced and that proper internal controls are in place to ensure the soundness of
the accounting system.

The accounts payable subsidiary ledger holds the details about all of the amounts a company owes to
people and/or companies. In the accounts payable subsidiary ledger, each vendor (the person or company
from whom you purchased inventory or other items) has an account that shows the details of all transactions.
Similar to the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger, the purchases subsidiary journal indicates the date on
which a transaction took place; a reference column used in the same manner as previously described for

6 Joseph R. Dervaes. “Accounts Receivable Fraud, Part Five: Other Accounting Manipulations.” Fraud Magazine. July/August, 2004. http://www.fraud-magazine.com/
article.aspx?id=4294967822

474

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

accounts receivable subsidiary ledgers; and finally, the subsidiary ledger shows the amount charged or the
amount paid. Following are the transactions for ABC Inc. and XYZ Inc. The final balance indicated on each
subsidiary purchases journal shows the amount the company owes ABC and XYZ.

If the two amounts are added together, the company owes $305 in total to the two companies. The $305 is the
amount that will show in the Accounts Payable general ledger account.

YOUR TURN
Using the Accounts Payable Subsidiary Ledger
Find the balance in each account in the accounts payable subsidiary ledger that follows. Note that each
vendor account has a unique account number or AP No.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Solution

475

476

7.3

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Analyze and Journalize Transactions Using Special Journals

Accounting information systems were paper based until the introduction of the computer, so special journals
were widely used. When accountants used a paper system, they had to write the same number in multiple
places and thus could make a mistake. Now that most businesses use digital technology, the step of posting to
journals is performed by the accounting software. The transactions themselves end up on transaction files
rather than in paper journals, but companies still print or make available on the screen something that closely
resembles the journals. Years ago, all accounting record keeping was manual. If a company had many
transactions, that meant many journal entries to be recorded in the general journal. People soon realized that
certain types of transactions occurred more frequently than any other types of transaction, so to save time,
they designed a special journal for each type that occurs frequently (e.g., credit sales, credit purchases,
receipts of cash, and disbursements of cash). We would enter these four types of transactions into their own
journals, respectively, rather than in the general journal. Thus, in addition to the general journal, we also have
the sales journal, cash receipts journal, purchases journal, and cash disbursements journals.
The main difference between special journals using the perpetual inventory method and the periodic
inventory method is that the sales journal in the perpetual method, as you have seen in the prior examples in

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

477

the chapter, will have a column to record a debit to Cost of Goods Sold and a credit to Inventory. In the
purchases journal, using the perpetual method will require we debit Inventory instead of Purchases. Another
difference is that the perpetual method will include freight charges in the Inventory account, while the periodic
method will have a special Freight-in account that will be added when Cost of Goods Sold will be computed.
For a refresher on perpetual versus periodic and related accounts such as freight-in, please refer to
Merchandising Transactions.

THINK IT THROUGH
Which Journal?
If you received a check from Mr. Jones for $500 for work you performed last week, which journal would
you use to record receipt of the amount they owed you? What would be recorded?

The Sales Journal
The sales journal is used to record sales on account (meaning sales on credit or credit sale). Selling on credit
always requires a debit to Accounts Receivable and a credit to Sales. Because every credit sales transaction is
recorded in the same way, recording all of those transactions in one place simplifies the accounting process.
Figure 7.15 shows an example of a sales journal. Note there is a single column for both the debit to Accounts
Receivable and the credit to Sales, although we need to post to both Accounts Receivable and Sales at the end
of each month. There is also a single column for the debit to Cost of Goods Sold and the credit to Merchandise
Inventory, though again, we need to post to both of those. In addition, for companies using the perpetual
inventory method, there is another column representing a debit to Cost of Goods Sold and a credit to
Merchandise Inventory, since two entries are made to record a sale on account under the perpetual inventory
method.

Figure 7.15
The information in the sales journal was taken from a copy of the sales invoice, which is the source document
representing the sale. The sales invoice number is entered so the bookkeeper could look up the sales invoice
and assist the customer. One benefit of using special journals is that one person can work with this journal
while someone else works with a different special journal.
At the end of the month, the bookkeeper, or computer program, would total the A/R Dr and Sales Cr column
and post the amount to the Accounts Receivable control account in the general ledger and the Sales account in
the general ledger. The Accounts Receivable control account in the general ledger is the total of all of the
amounts customers owed the company. Also at the end of the month, the total debit in the cost of goods sold

478

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

column and the total credit to the merchandise inventory column would be posted to their respective general
ledger accounts.
The company could have made these entries in the general journal instead of the special journal, but if it had,
this would have likely caused the sales transactions to be separated from each other and spread throughout
the journal, making it harder to find and keep track of them. When a sales journal is used, if the company is
one where sales tax is collected from the customer, then the journal entry would be a debit to Accounts
Receivable and a credit to Sales and Sales Tax Payable, and this would require an additional column in the
sales journal to record the sales tax. For example, a $100 sale with $10 additional sales tax collected would be
recorded as a debit to Accounts Receivable for $110, a credit to Sales for $100 and a credit to Sales Tax Payable
for $10.
The use of a reference code in any of the special journals is very important. Remember, after a sale is recorded
in the sales journal, it is posted to the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger, and the use of a reference code
helps link the transactions between the journals and ledgers. Recall that the accounts receivable subsidiary
ledger is a record of each customer’s account. It looked like Figure 7.16 for Baker Co.

Figure 7.16

Accounts Receivable Subsidiary Ledger. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Using the reference information, if anyone had a question about this entry, he or she would go to the sales
journal, page 26, transactions #45321 and #45324. This helps to create an audit trail, or a way to go back and
find the original documents supporting a transaction.

YOUR TURN
Which Journal Do You Use?
Match each of the transactions in the right column with the appropriate journal from the left column.
A. Purchases journal

i. Sales on account

B. Cash receipts journal

ii. Adjusting entries

C. Cash disbursements journal

iii. Receiving cash from a charge customer

D. Sales journal

iv. Buying inventory on credit

E. General journal

v. Paying the electric bill

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

479

Solution
A. iv; B. iii; C. v; D. i; E. ii.

Comprehensive Example
Let us return to the sales journal, shown in Figure 7.17 that includes information about Baker Co. as well as
other companies with whom the company does business.

Figure 7.17

Partial Sales Journal. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)
At the end of the month, the total Sales on credit were $2,775. The transactions would be posted in
chronological order in the sales journal. As you can see, the first transaction is posted to Baker Co., the second
one to Alpha Co., then Tau Inc., and then another to Baker Co. On the date each transaction is posted in the
sales journal, the appropriate information would be posted in the subsidiary ledger for each of the customers.
As an example, on January 3, amounts related to invoices 45321 and 45322 are posted to Baker’s and Alpha’s
accounts, respectively, in the appropriate subsidiary ledger. At the end of the month, the total of $2,775 would
be posted to the Accounts Receivable control account in the general ledger. Baker Co.’s account in the
subsidiary ledger would show that they owe $1,450; Alpha Co. owes $625; and Tau Inc. owes $700 (Figure 7.18).

480

Figure 7.18

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Accounts Receivable Subsidiary Ledger. Individual accounts in the accounts receivable

subsidiary ledger. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
At the end of the month, we would post the totals from the sales journal to the general ledger (Figure 7.19).

Figure 7.19

Accounts Receivable General Ledger. End-of-month posting to the Accounts Receivable Control

Total account in the general ledger. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)
Altogether, the three individual accounts owe the company $2,775, which is the amount shown in the Accounts
Receivable control account. It is called a control total because it helps keep accurate records, and the total in
the accounts receivable must equal the balance in Accounts Receivable in the general ledger. If the amount of
all the individual accounts receivable accounts did not add up to the total in the Accounts Receivable general
ledger/control account, it would indicate that we made a mistake. Figure 7.20 shows how the accounts and
amounts are posted.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Figure 7.20

481

Sales Journal. Sales journal transactions are posted individually to the accounts receivable

subsidiary ledger and in total to the general ledger. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

The Cash Receipts Journal
When the customer pays the amount owed, (generally using a check), bookkeepers use another shortcut to
record its receipt. They use a second special journal, the cash receipts journal. The cash receipts journal is used
to record all receipts of cash (recorded by a debit to Cash). In the preceding example, if Baker Co. paid the
$1,450 owed, there would be a debit to Cash for $1,450 and a credit to Accounts Receivable. A notation would
be made in the reference column to indicate the payment had been posted to Baker Co.’s accounts receivable
subsidiary ledger. After Baker Co.’s payment, the cash receipts journal would appear as in Figure 7.21.

482

Figure 7.21

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Page from the Cash Receipts Journal. Check the box when you post the transaction to the

customer’s account in the subsidiary ledger. (Acct # can be the customer’s account or, if the transaction
touches something other than a customer’s account, it can be that account’s number.) (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
And the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger for Baker Co. would also show the payment had been posted
(Figure 7.22).

Figure 7.22

Accounts Receivable Subsidiary Ledger. This is Baker Co.’s account in the accounts receivable

subsidiary ledger. Note that we always know how much Baker owes us and how long it has been since Baker
paid. SJ stands for sales journal, and CR stands for cash receipts journal. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
In the cash receipts journal, the credit can be to Accounts Receivable when a customer pays on an account, or
Sales, in the case of a cash sale, or to some other account when cash is received for other reasons. For
example, if we overpaid our electric bill, we could get a refund check in the mail. We would use the cash
receipts journal because we are receiving cash, but the credit would be to our Utility Expense account. If you
look at the example in Figure 7.23, you see that there is no column for Utility Expense, so how would it be
recorded? We would use some generic column title such as “other” to represent those cash transactions in the
subsidiary ledger though the specific accounts would actually be identified by account number in the special
journal. We would look up the account number for Utility Expense and credit the account for the amount of
the check. If we received a refund from the electric company on June 10 in the amount of $100, we would find
the account number for utility expense (say it is 615) and record it.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Figure 7.23

483

Cash Receipts Journal. The “Ref” column stands for reference and can be anything that helps us

remember. For example, in the problem, the Ref could be the number of the check the company sent us. Or it
could be the account number we use for that company. It is part of the audit trail. Other means “various,” so
we would use the account number for utility expense and credit it. When it is posted to the general ledger, we
will “check” the box next to 615 to remind ourselves that it has been posted. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
At the end of the month, we total the Cash column in the cash receipts journal and debit the Cash account in
the general ledger for the total. In this case there were two entries in the cash receipts journal, the cash
received from Baker and the refund check for an overpayment on utilities for a total cash received and
recorded in the cash receipts journal of $1,550, as shown in Figure 7.24.

Figure 7.24

General Ledger: Cash. Cash receipts journal ending balance for January is posted to the cash

account in the general ledger. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)
Any accounts used in the Other Accounts column must be entered separately in the general ledger to the
appropriate account. Figure 7.25 shows how the refund would be posted to the utilities expense account in the
general ledger.

Figure 7.25

General Ledger: Utilities Expense. Any postings to Other accounts in the cash receipts journal

are posted to the appropriate account in the general ledger. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

484

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

The Cash Disbursements Journal
Many transactions involve cash. We enter all cash received into the cash receipts journal, and we enter all cash
payments into the cash disbursements journal, sometimes also known as the cash payments journal. Good
internal control dictates the best rule is that all cash received by a business should be deposited, and all cash
paid out for monies owed by the business should be made by check. Money paid out is recorded in the cash
disbursements journal, which is generally kept in numerical order by check number and includes all of the
checks recorded in the checkbook register. If we paid this month’s phone bill of $135 with check #4011, we
would enter it as shown in Figure 7.26 in the cash disbursements journal.

Figure 7.26

Using the Cash Disbursements Journal. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The total of all of the cash disbursements for the month would be recorded in the general ledger Cash account
(Figure 7.27) as follows. Note that the information for both the cash receipts journal and the cash
disbursements journal are recorded in the general ledger Cash account.

Figure 7.27

General Ledger: Cash. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)

The Purchases Journal
Many companies enter only purchases of inventory on account in the purchases journal. Some companies also
use it to record purchases of other supplies on account. However, in this chapter we use the purchases journal
for purchases of inventory on account, only. It will always have a debit to Merchandise Inventory if you are
using the perpetual inventory method and a credit to Accounts Payable, or a debit to Purchases and a credit to
Accounts Payable if using the periodic inventory method. It is similar to the sales journal because it has a
corresponding subsidiary ledger, the accounts payable subsidiary ledger. Since the purchases journal is only
for purchases of inventory on account, it means the company owes money. To keep track of whom the
company owes money to and when payment is due, the entries are posted daily to the accounts payable
subsidiary ledger. Accounts Payable in the general ledger becomes a control account just like Accounts
Receivable. If we ordered inventory from Jones Mfg. (account number 789) using purchase order #123 and

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

485

received the bill for $250, this would be recorded in the purchases journal as shown in Figure 7.28.

Figure 7.28

Purchases Journal. Recording the purchase of merchandise on account in the purchases journal.

(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The posting reference would be to indicate that we had entered the amount in the accounts payable
subsidiary ledger (Figure 7.29).

Figure 7.29

Accounts Payable Subsidiary Ledger. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC

BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The total of all accounts payable subsidiary ledgers would be posted at the end of the month to the general
ledger Accounts Payable control account. The sum of all the subsidiary ledgers must equal the amount
reported in the general ledger.

General Journal
Why use a general journal if we have all the special journals? The reason is that some transactions do not fit in
any special journal. In addition to the four special journals presented previously (sales, cash receipts, cash
disbursements, and purchases), some companies also use a special journal for Sales returns and allowances
and another special journal for Purchase returns and allowances if they have many sales returns and purchase
returns transactions. However, most firms enter those transactions in the general journal, along with other
transactions that do not fit the description of the specific types of transactions contained in the four special
journals. The general journal is also necessary for adjusting entries (such as to recognize depreciation, prepaid
rent, and supplies that we have consumed) and closing entries.

YOUR TURN
Using the Sales and Cash Receipts Journals
You own and operate a business that sells goods to other businesses. You allow established customers to buy
goods from you on account, meaning you let them charge purchases and offer terms of 2/10, n/30. Record the
following transactions in the sales journal and cash receipts journal:

486

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Jan. 3

Sales on credit to VJ Armitraj, Ltd., amount of $7,200, Invoice # 317745

Jan. 9

Sales on credit to M. Baghdatis Inc., amount of $5,200, Invoice # 317746

Jan. 16

Receive $7,200 from VJ Armitraj, Ltd. (did not receive during the discount period)

Jan. 17

Sales on credit to A. Ashe Inc., amount of $3,780, Invoice #317747

Jan. 18

Receive the full amount owed from M. Baghdatis Inc. within the discount period

Solution

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

487

Ensure that the total of all individual accounts receivable equals the total of accounts receivable, or:
0 + $3,780 + 0 = $3,780.

7.4

Prepare a Subsidiary Ledger

Now that you have seen four special journals and two special ledgers, it is time to put all the pieces together.
Record the following transactions for Store Inc. in the special journals and post to the general ledger provided.
Also post to the subsidiary ledgers provided. Beginning account balances are shown below. Use the perpetual
inventory method and the gross method of dealing with sales terms.
First, enter these transactions manually by creating the relevant journals and subsidiary ledgers. Then enter
them using QuickBooks.

488

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Transactions for Store Inc.
Jan. 2

Issued check #629 for January store rent: $350.00

Jan. 3

Received check from PB&J in payment for December sale on credit, $915.00

Jan. 4

Issued check #630 to D & D in payment for December purchase on credit of $736.00

Jan. 5

Sold goods for $328.00 to Jones Co. on credit, Invoice # 234 (Note: COGS is $164)

Jan. 6

Bought goods from BSA for $4,300.00, Purchase Order # 71, terms: 2/10, net/30

Jan. 8

Sold goods on credit to Black & White Inc. for $2,100, Invoice # 235, terms: 1/10, net/30 (Note:
COGS is $1,050)

Jan. 9

Issued check #63 for telephone bill received today, $72.00

Jan. 10

Issued check #632 to pay BSA in full, PO #71.

Jan. 15

Received full payment from Black & White, Inc., Invoice # 235

Jan. 20

Bought merchandise from Dow John, $525.00 payable in 30 days, Purchase Order # 72

Jan. 26

Returned $100 of merchandise to Dow John, relating to Purchase Order #72

Jan. 31

Recorded cash sales for the month of $3,408 (Note: COGS is $1,704)

Jan. 31

Recognized that half of the Prepaid Insurance has been consumed

Table 7.2
Record all transactions using the sales journal, purchases journal, cash receipts journal, cash disbursements
journal, and the general journal and post to the accounts receivable and accounts payable subsidiary ledgers.
Then prepare a schedule of accounts receivable and a schedule of accounts payable.

Explanation:
Jan. 3

The company received payment from PB&J; thus, a cash receipt is recorded.

Jan. 15

The company received payment on goods that were sold on Jan. 8 with credit terms if paid within
the discount period. The payment was received within the discount period.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Jan. 31

489

Cash sales are recorded.

Explanation:
Jan. 26

The company returns merchandise (inventory) previously purchased. Since the company is using
the perpetual method, a credit is made to Inventory.

Jan. 31

An adjusting entry is made to recognize insurance expense for the current month that had
previously been prepaid.

Explanation:
Jan. 8

Sales on credit are recorded

Explanation:
Jan. 2

Rent for the month is paid.

Jan. 4

Payment is made for inventory purchased on account in a prior month.

490

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Jan. 9

Paid the telephone bill.

Jan. 10

Paid for inventory purchased earlier on account. The payment arrangement had credit terms; the
invoice was paid within the time allowed, and the discount was taken.

Explanation:
Jan. 6

Inventory is purchased on account.

Jan. 20

Inventory is purchased on account.

At the end of the month, each of the previous journal totals are posted to the appropriate account in the
general ledger, and any individual account postings, such as to Rent Expense (Jan. 2 transaction) would also be
posted to the general ledger. Note that each account used by the company has its own account section in the
general ledger.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

491

492

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

493

494

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

If you check Accounts Receivable in the general ledger, you see the balance is $2,989, and the balance in
Accounts Payable is $6,071. If the numbers did not match, we would have to find out where the error was and
then fix it.
The purpose of keeping subsidiary ledgers is for accuracy and efficiency. They aid us in keeping accurate
records. Since the total of the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger must agree with the balance shown in the
accounts receivable general ledger account, the system helps us find mistakes. Since bookkeeping using
ledgers is older than the United States, it was an ingenious way to double-check without having to actually do
everything twice. It provided an internal control over record keeping. Today, computerized accounting
information systems use the same method to store and total amounts, but it takes a lot less time.
7.5

Describe Career Paths Open to Individuals with a Joint Education in

Accounting and Information Systems
We use accounting information to make decisions about the business. Computer applications now provide so
much data that data analytics is one of the newest career areas in business. Universities are beginning to

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

495

offer degrees in data analysis. Software companies have created different applications to analyze data
including SAS, Apache Hadoop, Apache Spark, SPSS, RapidMiner, Power BI, ACL, IDEA, and many more to help
companies discover useful information from the transactions that occur. Big data refers to the availability of
large amounts of data from various sources, including the internet. For example, social media sites contain
tremendous amounts of data that marketing companies analyze to determine how popular a product is, and
how best to market it. There is so much data to analyze that new ways of mining it for predictive value have
evolved.
Another emerging area involves cryptocurrency, or the use of a digital currency that uses encryption
technologies that make these cryptocurrencies impossible to counterfeit. The use of cryptocurrency does not
require a bank to transfer or clear funds as is the case with other currencies. Bitcoin is the most well-known
cryptocurrency. Blockchain is the platform on which Bitcoin is built. Blockchain serves as a shared ledger for
Bitcoin but is also the foundation of many other applications. Simply put, blockchain offers different parties to
a transaction (e.g., a buyer and a seller) the opportunity to use a shared ledger rather than each having their
own separate ledgers as is the case with traditional systems. Bitcoin is currently accepted by some large, wellknown companies including PwC and EY (the two largest of the “big 4” accounting firms), and Overstock.com.
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) software is a collection of integrated programs that track all operations
in a company, from payroll to accounts payable, manufacturing, and maintaining electronic connections with
suppliers. For example, companies that sell goods to Walmart, have access to Walmart’s electronic inventory
records so the vendors can make sure Walmart has the right amount of goods on hand. Having such a close
relationship brings rewards. They will probably receive payment sooner, using EFT (electronic funds transfer).
The use of accounting information systems (AISs) has drastically changed the way we prepare tax returns.
Software is now written to walk anyone through preparing his or her own tax return using an expert system.
An expert system asks questions like: are you married? If the answer is yes, the software knows to use the
married tax tables, and if the answer is no, it uses the single tables. Based on this answer, it will know what
kind of question to ask next. Accountants who understand expert systems and tax will be writing and auditing
tax software programs.
Firms are also developing and using artificial intelligence (AI) systems to perform tasks previously
performed by accounting professionals, but now are freeing up the professionals to perform higher-level tasks
requiring analysis and judgment. Finally, security of all of this available data is a very important issue, and
there are a number of career paths and certifications that information technology professionals can attain.
The Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) offers several certifications including Certified
Information Systems Auditor (CISA), Certified in Risk and Information System Controls (CRISC), Certified
Information Security Manager (CISM), and others. There is so much technology that we are inundated with
more information than we can use. Because the information is being generated by a machine, we generally
trust the computation (although there are cases where a bug in the program can even cause problems with
simple math), but we also know the old saying, “garbage in, garbage out.” The computer does not always
know that your typo is garbage. If you enter the wrong number, the system processes it as if it were the right
number. That means we have to build some way into the program to control what is input into the system. For
example, if you fill out a form online and it asks for your zip code, does it let you enter just four digits? No—the
computer knows that it should only go to the next step if you enter five digits. However, you can enter the
wrong digits and it might not catch it. It is critical that we build as many internal controls into our
computerized systems as possible so that we can find errors at the input stage before they get into our
system. In other words, by using these “preventive” controls, we do not allow “garbage” data to get into our
system.
Computerized AISs have also brought changes to the audit trail. In the past, accountants had a set of books

496

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

that were paper based. You could see where a transaction was recorded and posted (and see if it had been
erased). Once you enter it into a computer, it becomes part of an electronic audit trail, but the trail is only as
good as the program that runs it. The screen could show you one number, but the system could be working
with a different number all together. In fact, there have been criminal cases in which people wrote programs
to cover up fraud. One such program functioned so that when an item was scanned, the correct amount
displayed to the customer, but it was recorded in the books as a smaller amount, so the company paid less in
sales tax and much less in income tax.
AISs have become more important because information and technology are more important.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Is Technology Always Better?
Technology allows one person to do a job that once took a dozen people to do. However, that can also
lead to problems. For example, years ago, one person working in the accounts receivable department at
Burlington Industries would have been in charge of a few customers. If those customers were not paying
their bills on time, a person would be aware of it. Today, one person might be in charge of all accounts
receivable. That person may not have time to call individual customers, so everything is preprogrammed.
If the customer wanted to place a large order that caused them to go over their limit, the software would
deny it instead of having a person weigh the risk of extending more credit.

A risk inherent in an AIS is that one person has access to a lot of information, and sometimes the information
crosses department lines. Companies have to figure out ways to mitigate the risk, because AISs are truly
essential to businesses today, especially with the growth of e-business and e-commerce. Think of the different
business processes when a purchase is made through Amazon.com. Their AIS must be able to access
inventory records, access customer information and records, process credit cards, calculate delivery dates,
handle coupons or discounts, and remember where to ship the goods. Amazon would not be what it is today
without all of its systems working together. Seeing what Amazon has accomplished opens the door for other
companies to follow, and they will need people who understand the system.
Forensic accounting involves the use of accounting skills to inspect the accounting records in order to
determine if fraud or embezzlement have occurred. Many universities are offering forensic accounting
degrees to prepare students who can testify to criminal activity present in the accounting records.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
The Founding of the Securities and Exchange Commission
In 1933 and 1934, the US Congress passed two acts that established the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC), giving it the right to regulate and enforce the regulations concerning commerce in
the United States. The website of the SEC (https://www.SEC.gov/) allows you to view all public company
financial reporting and provides a link to all current litigation against individuals and companies that
have been accused of breaking an SEC regulation. If you go to the site and look for the Litigation
Releases section, you can click on individual cases and find that some cases of fraud involve the use of an

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

497

accounting information system.
The Patriot Act also came out of the 9/11 attacks (signed October 26, 2001). The letters in Patriot stand
for the following: providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism. The goal of
the act was to prevent any other attacks on the United States by allowing enhanced surveillance
procedures.
The act gave law enforcement officials the right to access computers to track IP addresses, websites
visited, credit card information provided electronically, and so on, in an effort to uncover terrorism
before an attack was made. Several parts of the act call for banks to report suspected money laundering
activities. Money laundering is an attempt to hide the facts of the original transaction and would involve
an accountant. If you were selling drugs for cash and then tried to deposit that much cash in a bank, the
bank would report it, so you would try to cover up where the cash came from and run it through a
legitimate company. That is money laundering.
The Patriot Act also includes a section requiring auditors to verify that a company has controls in place to
prevent an attack on its accounting information system and that the company has a disaster plan
including backup records in case of a disaster.

The AIS enables a company to record all of its business transactions. Systems are different depending on the
company’s needs. The AIS holds a lot of the information used to run a business. One system can provide
everything needed for external reporting to government agencies involving payroll and income taxation. The
same system can provide the data needed for managerial analysis used for pricing, budgeting, decisionmaking, and efficiency studies. Every company is required to keep records of their financial activity, and this
means job security for people who are knowledgeable about AISs.

498

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Key Terms
accounting information system (AIS) set of business processes that record transactions using journals and
ledgers (for paper systems) and computer files (for computerized systems) to keep track of a company’s
transactions, process the data associated with these transactions, and produce output useful for internal
and external decision-making and analysis
accounts payable subsidiary ledger special ledger that contains information about all vendors and the
amounts we owe them; the total of all accounts in the accounts payable subsidiary ledger must equal the
total of accounts payable control account in the general ledger
accounts receivable control accounts receivable account in the general ledger
accounts receivable subsidiary ledger special ledger that contains information about all customers and the
amounts they owe; the total of all accounts in the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger must equal the
total of accounts receivable control account in the general ledger
artificial intelligence computerized systems that are taught to use reasoning and other aspects of human
intelligence to mimic some of the tasks humans perform
audit trail step-by-step trail of evidence documenting the history of a transaction from its inception and all
the steps it went through until its completion
big data data sets from online transactions and other sources that are so large that new software and
methods have been created to analyze and mine them so they can provide insight into trends and
patterns of the business
blockchain underlying technology Bitcoin is built on; provides a single shared ledger used by all of the
parties to a transaction resulting in cheaper, more secure, and more private transactions
cash disbursements journal special journal that is used to record outflows of cash; every time cash leaves
the business, usually when we issue a check, we record in this journal
cash receipts journal special journal that is used to record inflows of cash; every time we receive checks and
currency from customers and others, we record these cash receipts in this journal
cloud computing using the internet to access software and information storage facilities provided by
companies (there is usually a charge) rather than, or in addition to, storing this data on the company’s
computer hard drive or in paper form
cryptocurrency digital currency that uses encryption techniques to verify transfer of the funds but operates
independently of a bank
data parts of accounting transactions that constitute the input to an accounting information system
data analytics analyzing the huge amount of data generated by all the electronic transactions occurring in a
business
data/information storage way to save data and information; can be on paper, computer hard drive, or
through the internet to save in the cloud
enterprise resource planning (ERP) system that helps a company streamline its operations and helps
management respond quickly to change
expert system software program that is built on a database; software asks question and uses the response
to ask the next question or offer advice
forensic accounting using accounting and computer skills to look for fraud and to analyze financial records
in hard copy and electronic formats
point of sale point of time when a sales transaction occurs
point-of-sale system (POS) computerized system to record and process a sale immediately when it occurs,
usually by scanning the product bar code

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

499

purchases journal special journal that is used to record purchases of merchandise inventory on credit; it
always debits the merchandise inventory account (if using the perpetual inventory method) or the
Purchases account (if using the periodic method)
sales journal special journal that is used to record all sales on credit; it always debits accounts receivable
and credits sales, and if the company uses the perpetual inventory method it also debits cost of goods
sold and credits merchandise inventory
schedule of accounts payable table showing each amount owed and to whom it must be paid; total of the
schedule should equal the total of accounts payable in the general ledger
schedule of accounts receivable table showing each customer and the amount owed; total of the schedule
should equal the total of accounts receivable in the general ledger
source document paper document or electronic record that provides evidence that a transaction has
occurred and includes details about the transaction
special journal book of original entry that is used to record transactions of a similar type in addition to the
general journal
turn-around document paper document that starts off as an output document from one part of the
accounting information system (billing sends bill to customer), that becomes input to another part of the
accounting information system upon completion of the next phase of the process (accounts receivable
receives payment made on bill)

Summary
7.1 Define and Describe the Components of an Accounting Information System
• An accounting information system is a set of business processes that record transactions using journals
and ledgers (a paper-based system) or computer files (using a computerized system) to keep track of a
company’s money and other assets.
• The key steps in an accounting information system are input, processing, and output.
◦ Input: This is any way to record the transaction.
◦ Processing: This is a method of combining similar kinds of information (like adding all cash sales
together to get a total that is separate from all credit sales; and then adding everything to find total
sales).
◦ Output: Any way used to display the results of the processing is output.
◦ Source document: This is a record that a transaction has taken place; it is often used at the input
stage.
◦ Storage: This is any method used to save the results generated by the system. Data that is stored is
retrieved and used in the input, processing, or output stage. Additional data and information are also
stored during these processes.
7.2 Describe and Explain the Purpose of Special Journals and Their Importance to Stakeholders
• We use special journals to keep track of similar types of transactions.
• We use special journals to save time because the same types of transactions occur over and over.
• To decide which special journal to use, first ask, “Is cash involved?” If the answer is “Yes,” then use either
the cash receipts or cash disbursements journal.
• The cash receipts journal always debits cash but can credit almost anything (primarily sales, Accounts
Receivable, or a new loan from the bank).
• The cash disbursements journal always credits cash but can debit almost anything (Accounts Payable,
Notes Payable, sales returns and allowances, telephone expense, etc.).

500

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

• The sales journal always debits Accounts Receivable and always credits Sales. If the company uses a
perpetual inventory method, it also debits cost of goods sold and credits inventory.
• The purchases journal always debits Purchases (if using the periodic inventory method) or Inventory (if
using the perpetual inventory method) and credits Accounts Payable.
• We post the monthly balance from each of the special journals to the general ledger at the end of the
month.
• We post from all journals to the subsidiary ledgers daily.
• We use the general journal for transactions that do not fit anywhere else—generally, for adjusting and
closing entries, and can be for sales returns and/or purchase returns.
• The accounts receivable subsidiary ledger contains all of the details about individual accounts.
• The total of the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger must equal the total in the Accounts Receivable
general ledger account.
• The accounts payable subsidiary ledger contains all of the details about individual accounts payable
accounts.
• The total of the accounts payable subsidiary ledger must equal the total in the Accounts Payable general
ledger account.
7.3 Analyze and Journalize Transactions Using Special Journals
• Rules of cash receipts journals: Use any time you receive cash. Always debit Cash and credit Accounts
Receivable or some other account.
• Rules of cash disbursements journals: Any time a check is issued, there should be a credit to cash and a
debit to AP or typically an expense. Always credit Cash and debit Accounts Payable or some other account.
• Rules of sales journals: Use only for sales of goods on credit (when customers charge the amount).
Always debit Accounts Receivable and credit Sales and debit Cost of Goods Sold and credit Merchandise
Inventory when using a perpetual inventory system.
• Rules of purchases journals: Use only for purchase of goods (inventory) on credit (when you charge the
amount). Always debit Merchandise Inventory when using a perpetual inventory system (or Purchases
when using a periodic inventory system) and credit Accounts Payable.
• Post daily to the subsidiary ledgers.
• Monthly, at the end of each month, after totaling all of the columns in each journal, post to the general
ledger accounts which include the Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable (general ledger) controlling
accounts. Note that the only column that you do not post the total to the general ledger account is the
Other Accounts column. There is no general ledger account called Other accounts. As mentioned, each
entry in that column is posted individually to its respective account.
7.4 Prepare a Subsidiary Ledger
• A schedule of accounts receivable is a list of all individual accounts and balances that make up accounts
receivable.
• A schedule of accounts payable is a list of all individual accounts and balances that make up accounts
payable.
7.5 Describe Career Paths Open to Individuals with a Joint Education in Accounting and Information
Systems
• Data analytics, artificial intelligence systems, data security credentials, blockchain applications, and
forensic accounting are some of the areas that provide newer career avenues for accounting
professionals.
• Taxes will continue to be prepared using software that pulls information from the accounting information
system.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

501

• Integrating accounting software with inventory management and electronic payment as used by Walmart
and Amazon will set new standards of business process automation.
• Forensic accounting, data security, artificial intelligence, and data analytics, are all areas for which
companies and government agencies will be seeking accounting graduates who are also knowledgeable
about information systems.

Multiple Choice
1.

7.1 So far, computer systems cannot yet ________.
A.

receive data and instructions from input devices such as a scanner.

B.

decide how to record a business transaction.

C.

communicate with other computers electronically.

D.

recognize that you made a mistake entering $100 when you meant to enter $101.

2.

7.1 Any device used to provide the results of processing data is a(n) ________ device.
A.

sources

B.

input

C.

output

D.

storage

3.

7.1 Source documents ________.
A.

are input devices

B.

are output devices

C.

do not have to be on paper

D.

cannot be electronic files

4.

7.1 All of the following can provide source data except ________.
A.

a scanning device at the grocery store

B.

a utility bill received in the mail

C.

a bar code reader

D.

software to process the source data

5.

7.1 A document that asks you to return an identifying part of it with your payment is a(n) ________.
A.

source document

B.

cloud document

C.

point-of-sale document

D.

turn-around document

6.

7.1 Which of the following is false about accounting information systems?
A.

They provide reports that people analyze.

B.

They prevent errors and stop employees from stealing inventory.

C.

They are designed to gather data about the company’s transactions.

D.

They consist of processes that involve input of data from source documents, processing, output, and
storage.

502

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

7.

7.2 An unhappy customer just returned $50 of the items he purchased yesterday when he charged the

goods to the company’s store credit card. Which special journal would the company use to record this
transaction?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

8.

7.2 A customer just charged $150 of merchandise on the company’s own charge card. Which special

journal would the company use to record this transaction?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

9.

7.2 A customer just charged $150 of merchandise using MasterCard. Which special journal would the

company use to record this transaction?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

10.

7.2 The company just took a physical count of inventory and found $75 worth of inventory was

unaccounted for. It was either stolen or damaged. Which journal would the company use to record the
correction of the error in inventory?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

11.

7.2 Your company paid rent of $1,000 for the month with check number 1245. Which journal would the

company use to record this?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

12.

7.2 On January 1, Incredible Infants sold goods to Babies Inc. for $1,540, terms 30 days, and received

payment on January 18. Which journal would the company use to record this transaction on the 18th?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

13.

503

7.2 Received a check for $72 from a customer, Mr. White. Mr. White owed you $124. Which journal

would the company use to record this transaction?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

14.

7.2 You returned damaged goods you had previously purchased from C.C. Rogers Inc. and received a

credit memo for $250. Which journal would your company use to record this transaction?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

15.

7.2 Sold goods for $650 cash. Which journal would the company use to record this transaction?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

16.

7.2 Sandren & Co. purchased inventory on credit from Acto Supply Co. for $4,000. Sandren & Co. would

record this transaction in the ________.
A.

general journal

B.

cash receipts journal

C.

cash disbursements journal

D.

purchases journal

E.

sales journal

17.

7.3 Sold goods for $650, credit terms net 30 days. Which journal would the company use to record this

transaction?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

18.

7.3 You returned damaged goods to C.C. Rogers Inc. and received a credit memo for $250. Which

journal(s) would the company use to record this transaction?
A.

sales journal only

B.

purchases journal and the accounts payable subsidiary ledger

C.

cash receipts journal and the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger

D.

cash disbursements journal and the accounts payable subsidiary ledger

E.

general journal and the accounts payable subsidiary ledger

504

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

19.

7.3 The sum of all the accounts in the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger should ________.
A.

equal the accounts receivable account balance in the general ledger before posting any amounts

B.

equal the accounts payable account balance in the general ledger before posting any amounts

C.

equal the accounts receivable account balance in the general ledger after posting all amounts

D.

equal the cash account balance in the general ledger after posting all amounts

20.

7.3 AB Inc. purchased inventory on account from YZ Inc. The amount was $500. AB Inc. uses an

accounting information system with special journals. Which special journal would the company use to record
this transaction?
A.

sales journal

B.

purchases journal

C.

cash receipts journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

21.

7.3 You just posted a debit to ABC Co. in the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger. Which special

journal did it come from?
A.

sales journal

B.

cash receipts journal

C.

purchases journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

22.

7.3 You just posted a credit to Stars Inc. in the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger. Which special

journal did it come from?
A.

sales journal

B.

cash receipts journal

C.

purchases journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

23.

7.3 You just posted a debit to Cash in the general ledger. Which special journal did it come from?
A.

sales journal

B.

cash receipts journal

C.

purchases journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

24.

7.3 You just posted a credit to Accounts Receivable. Which special journal did it come from?
A.

sales journal

B.

cash receipts journal

C.

purchases journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

25.

505

7.3 You just posted a credit to Sales and a debit to Cash. Which special journal did it come from?
A.

sales journal

B.

cash receipts journal

C.

purchases journal

D.

cash disbursements journal

E.

general journal

26.

7.5 An enterprise resource planning (ERP) system ________.
A.

is software to help you prepare your tax return

B.

requires that you pay ransom before you can operate it

C.

is a large, company-wide integrated accounting information system that connects all of a company’s
applications

D.
27.

is part of the darknet
7.5 Which of the following is not a way to prevent your computer from being attacked by ransomware?

A.

making sure your antivirus security programs are up to date

B.

opening all attachments from emails from unknown senders

C.

using secure (password protected) networks and backing up your files regularly

D.

not using open Wi-Fi (nonpassword, nonencrypted) in public locations

28.

7.5 Big data is mined ________.
A.

to find business trends

B.

to record transactions

C.

as an alternative to creating an accounting information system

D.

as an alternative to the darknet

29.

7.5 Artificial intelligence refers to ________.
A.

tutorials that can make humans smarter than they naturally are

B.

programming computers to mimic human reasoning and perform tasks previously performed by
humans

C.

humans that do not possess reasonably high IQs

D.

a concept that exists only in science fiction but has not yet been achieved today

30.

7.5 Blockchain is a technology that ________.
A.

is in the early stages of being developed

B.

was a failed attempt to change the way we do business

C.

refers to an application developed strictly for the real estate business

D.

involves the use of a single shared ledger between the many parties that may be involved in a
transaction.

31.

7.5 Which of the following is not true about cybercurrency?
A.

Bitcoin is one of several cybercurrencies.

B.

It is an alternate currency that does not go through the banking system.

C.

It does not involve the actual exchange of physical currency.

D.

It is not accepted by any legitimate businesses.

506

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Questions
1.

7.1 Why does a student need to understand how to use a manual, paper-based accounting information

system since everyone uses computerized systems?
2.

7.1 Provide an example of how paper-based accounting information systems are different from

computerized systems.
3.

7.1 Why are scanners better than keyboards?

4.

7.1 Why are there so many different accounting information system software packages?

5.

7.1 Which area of accounting needs a computerized accounting information system the most—payroll,

tax, or preparing financial statements?
6.

7.1 The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) has stated that accountants will need

to have an even better understanding of computer systems in the future. Why do you think computer skills will
be more important?
7.

7.4 Which special journals also require an entry to a subsidiary ledger?

8.

7.4 What is a schedule of accounts receivable?

9.

7.4 How often do we post the cash column in the cash receipts journal to the subsidiary ledger?

10.

7.4 The schedule of accounts payable should equal what?

11.

7.4 Which amounts do we post daily and which do we post monthly?

12.

7.4 Why are special journals used?

13.

7.4 Name the four main special journals.

14.

7.4 A journal entry that requires a debit to Accounts Receivable and a credit to Sales goes in which

special journal?
15.

7.4 The purchase of equipment for cash would be recorded in which special journal?

16.

7.4 Can a sales journal be used to record sales on account and a cash sale? Why or why not?

17.

7.4 When should entries from the sales journal be posted?

18.

7.4 We record a sale on account that involves sales tax in which journal?

19.

7.4 We record purchases of inventory for cash in which journal(s)?

20.

7.4 Should the purchases journal have a column that is a debit to Accounts Payable?

21.

7.5 Forensic means “suitable for use in a court of law.” How does that have anything to do with

accounting?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

507

Exercise Set A
EA1.

7.1 For each of the following, indicate if the statement reflects an input component, output

component, or storage component of an accounting information system.
A.

A credit card scanner at a grocery store.

B.

A purchase order for 1,000 bottles of windshield washing fluid to be used as inventory by an auto parts
store.

C.

A report of patients who missed appointments at a doctor’s office.

D.

A list of the day’s cash and credit sales.

E.

Electronic files containing a list of current customers.

EA2.

7.1 All of the following information pertains to Green’s Grocery. Match each of the following parts of

Green’s accounting information system in the left-hand column with the appropriate item(s) from the righthand column. You may use items in the right-hand column more than once or not at all. There may be several
answers for each item in the left-hand column.
A. Source document

i. Check written for office supplies

B. Output device

ii. Invoice from a supplier of inventory

C. Input device

iii. Payroll check

D. Data and information storage

iv. Time card

E. Information processing

v. Computer software
vi. Keyboard
vii. Grocery store bar code scanner
viii. Printer
ix. Flash drive
x. Hard drive
xi. The cloud
xii. Computer screen

508

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

EA3.

7.2 Match the special journal you would use to record the following transactions. Select from the

following:
A. cash receipts journal

i. Sold inventory for cash

B. cash disbursements

ii. Sold inventory on account

journal
C. sales journal

iii. Received cash a week after selling items on credit

D. purchases journal

iv. Paid cash to purchase inventory

E. general journal

v. Paid a cash dividend to shareholders
vi. Sold shares of stock for cash
vii. Bought equipment for cash
viii. Recorded an adjusting entry for supplies
ix. Paid for a purchase of inventory on account within the discount period
x. Paid for a purchase of inventory on account after the discount period has
passed

EA4.

7.2 For each of the transactions, state which special journal (sales journal, cash receipts journal, cash

disbursements journal, purchases journal, or general journal) and which subsidiary ledger (Accounts
Receivable, Accounts Payable, or neither) would be used in recording the transaction.
A.

Paid utility bill

B.

Sold inventory on account

C.

Received but did not pay phone bill

D.

Bought inventory on account

E.

Borrowed money from a bank

F.

Sold old office furniture for cash

G.

Recorded depreciation

H. Accrued payroll at the end of the accounting period
I.

Sold inventory for cash

J.

Paid interest on bank loan

EA5.

7.3 Catherine’s Cookies has a beginning balance in the Accounts Payable control total account of

$8,200. In the cash disbursements journal, the Accounts Payable column has total debits of $6,800 for
November. The Accounts Payable credit column in the purchases journal reveals a total of $10,500 for the
current month. Based on this information, what is the ending balance in the Accounts Payable account in the
general ledger?
EA6.

7.3 Record the following transactions in the sales journal:

Jan. 15

Invoice # 325, sold goods on credit for $2,400, to Maroon 4, account # 4501

Jan. 22

Invoice #326, sold goods on credit for $3,500 to BTS, account # 5032

Jan. 27

Invoice #327, sold goods on credit for $1,250 to Imagine Fireflies, account # 3896

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

EA7.

509

7.3 Record the following transactions in the cash receipts journal.

Jun. 12

Your company received payment in full from Jolie Inc. in the amount of $1,225 for merchandise
purchased on June 4 for $1,250, invoice number #1032. Jolie Inc. was offered terms of 2/10, n/30.
Record the payment.

Jun. 15

Portman Inc. mailed you a check for $2500. The company paid for invoice #1027, dated June 1, in
the amount of $2,500, terms offered 3/10, n/30.

Jun. 17

Your company received a refund check (its check #12440) from the State Power Company
because you overpaid your electric bill. The check was in the amount of $72. The Utility Expense
account number is #450. Record receipt of the refund.

EA8.

7.4 Maddie Inc. has the following transactions for its first month of business.

May 1

Credit sale to Green Lantern Inc. for $1,999

May 2

Credit sale to Wonder Woman Inc. for $2,000

May 3

Credit sale to Flash Inc. for $3,050

May 4

Received $1,000 on account from Green Lantern Inc.

May 5

Credit sale to Black Panther Inc. for $1,875

May 6

Received the full amount from Flash Inc.

A.

What are the individual account balances, and the total balance, in the accounts receivable subsidiary
ledger?

B.

What is the balance in the accounts receivable general ledger (control) account?

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

7.1 For each of the following, indicate if the statement reflects an input component, output

component, or storage component of the accounting information system for a bank.
A.

Online customer check ordering system.

B.

Approved loan applications.

C.

Report of customers with savings accounts over $5,000.

D.

Desktop hard drive on computer used by bank president’s administrative assistant.

E.

List of the amount of money withdrawn from all of the bank’s ATMs on a given day.

510

EB2.

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

7.1 The following information pertains to Crossroads Consulting, Inc. Match each of the following

parts of Crossroad’s accounting information system in the left-hand column with the appropriate item(s) from
the right-hand column. You may use items in the right-hand column more than once or not at all. There may
be several answers for each item in the left-hand column. You may choose items in the right-hand column
more than once.
A. Source document

i. Sales invoice from cleaning company

B. Output device

ii. Printed check to be mailed to phone company

C. Input device

iii. Dropbox (online storage)

D. Data and information storage

iv. Voice-to-text software

E. Information processing

v. QuickBooks Accounting Software
vi. Keyboard
vii. Printer
viii. Bar code scanner
ix. Computer screen
x. Flash drive
xi. Text scanner
xii. Computing interest on a loan

EB3.

7.2 Match the special journal you would use to record the following transactions.

A. Cash Receipts

i. Took out a loan from the bank

Journal
B. Cash Disbursements

ii. Paid employee wages

Journal
C. Sales Journal

iii. Paid income taxes

D. Purchases Journal

iv. Sold goods with credit terms 1/10, 2/30, n/60

E. General Journal

v. Purchased inventory with credit terms n/90
vi. Sold inventory for cash
vii. Paid the phone bill
viii. Purchased stock for cash
ix. Recorded depreciation on the factory equipment
x. Returned defective goods purchased on credit to the supplier. The company
had not yet paid for them.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

EB4.

7.2 For each of the following transactions, state which special journal (Sales Journal, Cash Receipts

Journal, Cash Disbursements Journal, Purchases Journal, or General Journal) and which subsidiary ledger
(Accounts Receivable, Accounts Payable, neither) would be used in recording the transaction.
A.

Sold inventory for cash

B.

Issued common stock for cash

C.

Received and paid utility bill

D.

Bought office equipment on account

E.

Accrued interest on a loan at the end of the accounting period

F.

Paid a loan payment

G.

Bought inventory on account

H. Paid employees
I.

Sold inventory on account

J.

Paid monthly insurance bill

EB5.

7.3 Catherine’s Cookies has a beginning balance in the Accounts Receivable control total account of

$8,200. $15,700 was credited to Accounts Receivable during the month. In the sales journal, the Accounts
Receivable debit column shows a total of $12,000. What is the ending balance of the Accounts Receivable
account in the general ledger?
EB6.

7.3 Record the following transactions in the purchases journal:

Feb. 2

Purchased inventory on account from Pinetop Inc. (vendor account number 3765), Purchase
Order (PO) # 12345 in the amount of $3,456.

Feb. 8

Purchased inventory on account from Sherwood Company (vendor account number 5461), PO#
12346, in the amount of $2,951.

Feb. 12

Purchased inventory on account from Green Valley Inc. (vendor #4653), PO# 12347, in the
amount of $4,631.

EB7.
Mar. 1

7.3 Record the following transactions in the cash disbursements journal:
Paid Duke Mfg (account number D101) $980 for inventory purchased on Feb. 27 for $1,000. Duke
Mfg offered terms of 2/10, n/30, and you paid within the discount period using check #4012.

Mar. 3

Paid Emergency Plumbing $450. They just came to fix the leak in the coffee room. Give them
account number E143. Use check #4013 and debit the Repairs and Maintenance account, #655.

Mar. 5

Used check #4014 to pay Wake Mfg (account number W210) $1,684 for inventory purchased on
Feb. 25, no terms offered.

511

512

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

EB8.

7.4 Piedmont Inc. has the following transactions for its first month of business:

Jun. 1

Purchased inventory from Montana Inc. on credit for $4,500

Jun. 2

Purchased inventory from Payton Inc. on credit for $2,400

Jun. 3

Purchased inventory from Montana Inc. on credit for $1,800

Jun. 4

Paid $2,000 on account to Montana Inc.

Jun. 8

Purchased inventory on credit from Taylor Inc. for $2,000

Jun. 9

Paid Payton

A.

What are the individual account balances, and the total balance, in the accounts payable subsidiary
ledger?

B.

What is the balance in the Accounts Payable general ledger account?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

513

Problem Set A
PA1.

7.2 On June 30, Oscar Inc.’s bookkeeper is preparing to close the books for the month. The accounts

receivable control total shows a balance of $2,820.76, but the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger shows total
account balances of $2,220.76. The accounts receivable subsidiary ledger is shown here. Can you help find the
mistake?

514

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

PA2.

7.4 Evie Inc. has the following transactions during its first month of business. Journalize the

transactions that go in the sales journal.
Jun. 1

Credit sale (invoice #1) to Green Lantern Inc. (acc #101) for $1,999

Jun. 2

Credit sale (invoice #2) to Wonder Woman Inc. (acc #102) for $2,000

Jun. 3

Credit sale to Flash Inc. (invoice #3) (acc #103) for $3,050

Jun. 4

Received $1,000 on account from Green Lantern Inc.

Jun. 5

Credit sale (invoice #4) to Black Panther Inc. (acc #104) for $1,875

Jun. 6

Received the full amount from Flash Inc.

PA3.

7.4 The following transactions occurred for Donaldson Inc. during the month of July.

Jul. 1

Sold 50 items to Palm Springs Inc. and offered terms of 2/10, n/30, $4,000 on July 1, and issued
invoice #12 on account number #312

Jul. 5

Sold 20 thing-a-jigs to Miami Inc. for $2,150 cash on July 5, and issued invoice #13

Jul. 8

Sold 30 what-is to Smith Mfg. for $5,000 and offered terms of 2/10, n/30; issued invoice #14 on
account number #178

Jul. 9

Received payment from Palm Springs Inc.

Jul. 22

Received payment from Smith Mfg. after expiration of the discount period

A.

Record the transactions for Donaldson Inc. in the proper special journal and subsidiary ledger.

B.

Record the same transactions using QuickBooks, and print the journals and subsidiary ledger. They
should match.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

PA4.

515

7.4 Use the journals and ledgers that follow. Total the journals. Post the transactions to the subsidiary

ledger and (using T-accounts) to the general ledger accounts. Then prepare a schedule of accounts receivable.

PA5.

7.4 Brown Inc. records purchases in a purchases journal and purchase returns in the general journal.

Record the following transactions using a purchases journal, a general journal, and an accounts payable
subsidiary ledger. The company uses the periodic method of accounting for inventory.
Oct. 1

Purchased inventory on account from Price Inc. for $2,000

Oct. 1

Purchased inventory on account from Cabrera Inc. for $3,000

Oct. 8

Returned half of the inventory to Price Inc.

Oct. 9

Purchased inventory on account from Price Inc. for $4,200

516

B

PB1.

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Problem Set B
7.2 On June 30, Isner Inc.’s bookkeeper is preparing to close the books for the month. The accounts

receivable control total shows a balance of $550, but the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger shows total
account balances of $850. The accounts receivable subsidiary ledger is shown here. Can you help find the
mistake?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

PB2.

517

7.4 Piedmont Inc. has the following transactions for the month of July.

Jul. 1

Sold merchandise for $4,000 to Pinetop Inc. (account number PT152) and offered terms of 1/10,
n/30, on July 1, invoice # 1101

Jul. 5

Sold merchandise to Sherwood Inc. (account number SH 224), Invoice # 1102 for $2,450 cash on
July 5

Jul. 9

Sold merchandise, invoice #1103, to Cardinal Inc. (account number CA 118) for $5,000, and offered
terms of 3/10, n/30

Jul. 9

Received payment from Pinetop Inc.

Jul. 22

Received payment from Cardinal Inc. after expiration of the discount period

Jul. 30

Received a refund check in the amount of $120 from the insurance company (credit Insurance
Expense, account number 504)

A.

Record the transactions for Piedmont Inc. in the proper special journal, and post them to the
subsidiary ledger and general ledger account.

B.

Record the same transactions using QuickBooks, and print the special journals and subsidiary and
general ledger. Your solution done manually should match your solution using QuickBooks.

PB3.

7.4 Use the journals and ledgers that follows. Total and rule (draw a line under the column of

numbers) the journals. Post the transactions to the subsidiary ledger and (using T-accounts) to the general
ledger accounts. Then prepare a schedule of Accounts Payable.

518

PB4.

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

7.4 Comprehensive Problem: Manual Accounting Information System versus QuickBooks

The following problem is a comprehensive problem requiring you to compete all of the steps in the accounting
cycle, first manually and then by entering the same transactions and performing the same steps using
QuickBooks. This will demonstrate the important point that a manual accounting information system (AIS) and
a computerized AIS both allow the user to perform the same steps in the accounting cycle, but they are done
differently.
In a manual system, every step must be performed by the user. In contrast to this, in a computerized system,
for each transaction, the user determines the type of transaction it is and enters it in the appropriate data
entry screen. The computer then automatically places the transactions in transaction files (the equivalent of
journals in a manual system). The user then instructs the system to post the transaction to the subsidiary
ledger and at the end of the month to the general ledger. The computer can do the posting automatically.
Other steps done automatically by the computer are preparing a trial balance, closing entries, and generating
financial statements. The user would have to provide the computer with information about adjusting entries at
the end of the period. Some adjusting entries can be set up to be done automatically every month, but not all.
When we say the computer can do a specific step “automatically,” this presumes that a programmer wrote the
programs (i.e., detailed step-by-step instructions in a computer language) that tell the computer how to do the
task. The computer can then follow those instructions and do it “automatically” without human intervention.
Problem
Assume there is a small shoe store in your neighborhood with a single owner. The owner started the business
on December 1, 2018, and sells two types of shoes: a comfortable sneaker that is something athletes would
purchase, and a comfortable dress shoe that looks dressy but has the comfort of a sneaker. The name of the
business is The Shoe Horn. Complete tasks A and B that follow, using the detailed instructions for each.
Following is a list of all transactions that occurred during December 2018.
a.

Dec. 1

Jack Simmons, the owner contributed a $500,000 check from his personal account, which
he deposited into an account opened in the name of the business, to start the business.

b.

Dec. 1

He rented space that had previously been used by a shoe store and wrote check no. 100
for $9,000 for the first six month’s rent.

c.

Dec. 2

He paid for installation and phone usage $300 (check no. 101)

d.

Dec. 2

He paid for advertising in the local paper $150 (check no. 102). The ads will all run in
December.

e.

Dec. 2

He purchased $500 of office supplies (check no. 103)

f.

Dec. 3

He paid $300 for insurance for three months (December 2018, January and February 2019
using check no, 104).

g.

Dec. 4

He purchased 800 pairs of sneakers at $40 a pair– on account from Nike (using purchase
order no. 301). Payment terms were 2/10, net 30. Assume the shoe store uses the
perpetual inventory system.

h.

Dec. 5

He purchased 500 pairs of dress shoes from Footwear Corp. on account for $20 a pair
(using purchase order no. 302). Payment terms were 2/10, net 30

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

i.

Dec. 10

519

He made a sale on account of 20 pairs of sneakers at $100 a pair, to a local University –
Highland University (sales invoice number 2000) for their basketball team. Payment terms
were 2/10 net 30.

j.

Dec. 11

He made a sale on account of 2 pairs of dress shoes at $50 a pair (sales invoice no. 2001) to
a local charity, U.S. Veterans, that intended to raffle them off at one of their events.

k.

Dec. 12

He made a sale on account to The Jenson Group of 300 pairs of dress shoes at $50 a pair,
to use as part of an employee uniform. Payment terms were 2/10 net 30.

l.

Dec. 14

He made a cash sale for 2 sneakers at $120 each and 1 pair of shoes for $60.

m.

Dec. 14

He paid the amount owed to Footwear Corp (check no 105)

n.

Dec. 17

Highland University returned 2 pairs of sneakers they had previously purchased on
account.

o.

Dec. 18

He received a check from Highland University in full payment of their balance.

p.

Dec. 20

He made a cash sale to Charles Wilson of three pairs of sneakers at $120 each and 1 pair of
dress shoes at $60.

q.

Dec. 20

He made a partial payment to Nike for $20,000 (check number 106)

r.

Dec. 23

Received a $400 utility bill which will be paid in January.

s.

Dec. 27

Received a check from The Jenson Group in the amount of $9,000.

t.

Dec. 28

He paid $2,000 of his balance to Nike (check number 107)

A.

Enter all of the transactions and complete all of the steps in the accounting cycle assuming a manual
system. Follow the steps to be performed using a manual system.

B.

Enter the transactions into QuickBooks, complete all of the steps in the accounting cycle, and generate
the same reports (journals trial balances, ledgers, financial statements). Follow the steps to be
performed using a manual system. Follow the steps to be performed using QuickBooks.

Steps to be performed using a manual system

520

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

1. For each of the transactions listed for the month of December 2018, identify the journal to which the
entry should be recorded. Your possible choices are as follows: general journal (GJ), cash receipts
journal (CR), cash disbursements journal (CD), sales journal (SJ), or purchases journal (PJ). Templates
for the journals and ledgers have been provided.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

2. Enter each transaction in the appropriate journal using the format provided.

521

522

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

3. Open up Accounts Receivable subsidiary ledger accounts for customers and Accounts Payable
subsidiary ledger accounts for vendors using the format provided. Post each entry to the appropriate
subsidiary ledger on the date the transaction occurred.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

4. Total the four special journals, and post from all of them to the general ledger on the last day of
December. You should open ledger accounts for the following accounts:
◦ Cash
◦ Accounts Receivable
◦ Merchandise Inventory
◦ Prepaid Insurance
◦ Prepaid Rent
◦ Office Supplies
◦ Accounts Payable
◦ Purchases Discounts
◦ Utilities Expense Payable
◦ Jack Simmons, Capital
◦ Sales
◦ Sales Returns and Allowances
◦ Sales Discounts
◦ Cost of Goods Sold
◦ Rent Expense
◦ Advertising Expense
◦ Telephone Expense
◦ Utilities Expense
◦ Office Supplies Expense
◦ Insurance Expense

523

524

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

525

526

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

5. Compute balances for each general ledger account and for each Accounts Receivable and Accounts
Payable subsidiary ledger account.
6. Prepare a trial balance.
7. Prepare an accounts receivable schedule and an accounts payable schedule.
8. Prepare adjusting journal entries based on the following information given, record the entries in the
appropriate journal, and post the entries.
◦ There were $100 worth of office supplies remaining at the end of December.
◦ Make an adjusting entry relative to insurance.
◦ There was an additional bill received in the mail for utilities expense for the month of December
in the amount of $100 that is due by January 10, 2019. Jack Simmons intends to pay it in January.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

9. Prepare an adjusted trial balance
10. Prepare closing journal entries, record them in the general journal, and post them.

11. Prepare an Income statement, Statement of Owner’s Equity, and Balance Sheet.
Steps to be performed using QuickBooks. You can access a trial version of QuickBooks
(https://quickbooks.intuit.com/pricing/) to work through this problem.

527

528

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

1. Set up a new company called The Shoe Horn using easy step interview.
2. You will be adding a bank account, customizing preferences, adding customers, adding vendors,
adding products, and customizing the chart of accounts. You will not need to enter opening
adjustments since you are entering transactions for a new company, so there are no opening balances.
QuickBooks should automatically create a chart of accounts, but you can customize it, and you will
need to enter information for a customer list, vendor list, and (inventory) items list.
3. Use “QB transactions” to enter each of the following transactions for the month of December 2018.
You can use Onscreen Journal to enter transactions into the general journal, and Onscreen Forms to
enter transactions that will end up in the special journals. Identify the type of transaction it is: a sale, a
purchase, a receipt of cash, or a payment by check. The categories QuickBooks uses are banking and
credit card, customers and sales, vendors and expenses, employees and payroll (not needed in this
problem), and other. Note: there is no need to identify the journal as in a manual system or to enter a
journal entry, because in an AIS like QuickBooks, you enter the transaction information, and behind the
scenes, QuickBooks creates a journal entry that gets added to a transaction file (the equivalent of a
journal). After the transactions for the month have been entered, you can print out each of the five
journals.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

529

4. Enter the following transactions using the appropriate data entry screens based on the type of
transaction it is, as identified in step 3.
a.

Dec. 1

Jack Simmons, the owner contributed a $500,000 check from his personal account,
which he deposited into an account opened in the name of the business, to start
the business.

b.

Dec. 1

He rented space that had previously been used by a shoe store and wrote check
no. 100 for $9,000 for the first six month’s rent.

c.

Dec. 2

He paid for installation and phone usage $300 (check no. 101)

d.

Dec. 2

He paid for advertising in the local paper $150 (check no. 102). The ads will all run
in December.

e.

Dec. 2

He purchased $500 of office supplies (check no. 103)

f.

Dec. 3

He paid $300 for insurance for three months (December 2018, January and
February 2019 using check no, 104).

g.

Dec. 4

He purchased 800 pairs of sneakers at $40 a pair– on account from Nike (using
purchase order no. 301). Payment terms were 2/10, net 30. Assume the shoe store
uses the perpetual inventory system.

h.

Dec. 5

He purchased 500 pairs of dress shoes from Footwear Corp. on account for $20 a
pair (using purchase order no. 302). Payment terms were 2/10, net 30

i.

Dec. 10

He made a sale on account of 20 pairs of sneakers at $100 a pair, to a local
University – Highland University (sales invoice number 2000) for their basketball
team. Payment terms were 2/10 net 30.

j.

Dec. 11

He made a sale on account of 2 pairs of dress shoes at $50 a pair (sales invoice no.
2001) to a local charity, U.S. Veterans, that intended to raffle them off at one of
their events.

k.

Dec. 12

He made a sale on account to The Jenson Group of 300 pairs of dress shoes at $50
a pair, to use as part of an employee uniform. Payment terms were 2/10 net 30.

l.

Dec. 14

He made a cash sale for 2 sneakers at $120 each and 1 pair of shoes for $60.

m.

Dec. 14

He paid the amount owed to Footwear Corp (check no 105)

n.

Dec. 17

Highland University returned 2 pairs of sneakers they had previously purchased on
account.

o.

Dec. 18

He received a check from Highland University in full payment of their balance.

p.

Dec. 20

He made a cash sale to Charles Wilson of three pairs of sneakers at $120 each and
1 pair of dress shoes at $60.

q.

Dec. 20

He made a partial payment to Nike for $20,000 (check number 106)

r.

Dec. 23

Received a $400 utility bill which will be paid in January.

530

Chapter 7 Accounting Information Systems

s.

Dec. 27

Received a check from The Jenson Group in the amount of $9,000.

t.

Dec. 28

He paid $2,000 of his balance to Nike (check number 107)

5. Generate and print a trial balance. Use QB reports to print this and other reports.
6. Prepare and enter adjusting entries based on the following information given, and print them.
◦ There were $100 worth of office supplies remaining at the end of December.
◦ Make an adjusting entry relative to insurance
◦ There was an additional bill received in the mail for utilities expense for the month of December
in the amount of $100 that is due by January 10, 2019. Jack Simmons intends to pay it in January.
7. Generate and print an adjusted trial balance.
8. QuickBooks will automatically prepare closing journal entries.
9. Print the financial statements: the Income Statement (same as Profit and Loss Statement) and the
Balance Sheet.
10. Print all of the five journals. After the transactions for the month have been entered, you can print out
each of the five journals (general journal, cash receipts journal, cash disbursements journal, sales
journal, purchases journal).
11. Print the general ledger and the accounts receivable and accounts payable subsidiary ledgers.
12. Compare the items you printed from QuickBooks to what you have manually prepared. The content
should be identical, although the format may be slightly different. Note: while the results are the same,
the QuickBooks software did many of the steps for you automatically.

Thought Provokers
TP1.

7.2 Why must the Accounts Receivable account in the general ledger match the totals of all the

subsidiary Accounts Receivable accounts?
TP2.

7.2 Why would a company use a subsidiary ledger for its Accounts Receivable?

TP3.

7.2 If a customer owed your company $100 on the first day of the month, then purchased $200 of

goods on credit on the fifth and paid you $50 on fifteenth, the customer’s ending balance for the month would
show a (debit or credit) of how much?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

8

Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash
Figure 8.1 Fraud. Fraud and theft can be very dangerous to the health and survival of a company. This is an
issue that companies of all sizes face. (credit: modification of “Road Sign Attention” by “geralt”/Pixabay, CC0)

Chapter Outline
8.1 Analyze Fraud in the Accounting Workplace
8.2 Define and Explain Internal Controls and Their Purpose within an Organization
8.3 Describe Internal Controls within an Organization
8.4 Define the Purpose and Use of a Petty Cash Fund, and Prepare Petty Cash Journal Entries
8.5 Discuss Management Responsibilities for Maintaining Internal Controls within an Organization
8.6 Define the Purpose of a Bank Reconciliation, and Prepare a Bank Reconciliation and Its Associated
Journal Entries
8.7 Describe Fraud in Financial Statements and Sarbanes-Oxley Act Requirements

Why It Matters
One of Jennifer’s fondest memories was visiting her grandparents’ small country store when she was a child.
She was impressed by how happy the customers seemed to be in the welcoming environment. While
attending college, she decided that the college community needed a coffee/pastry shop where students and
the local citizens could congregate, spend time together, and enjoy a coffee or other beverage, along with a
pastry that Jennifer would buy from a local bakery. In a sense, she wanted to replicate the environment that
people found in her grandparents’ store.
After graduation, while she was in the planning stage, she asked her former accounting professor for advice
on planning and operating a business since she had heard that the attrition rate for new businesses is quite
high. The professor told her that one of the most important factors was the selection, hiring, and treatment of

532

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

happy and productive personnel. The professor further stated that, with the right personnel, many problems
that companies might face, such as fraud, theft, and the violation of the organization’s internal control policies
and principles, can be lessened.
To emphasize her point, the professor stated a statistic from the National Restaurant Association’s 2016
Restaurant Operations Report that restaurant staff were responsible for an estimated 75% of inventory theft.

[1]

This statistic led to the professor’s final gem of wisdom for Jennifer: hire the right people, create a pleasant
work environment, and also create an environment that does not tempt your personnel to consider fraudulent
or felonious activities.

8.1

Analyze Fraud in the Accounting Workplace

In this chapter, one of the major issues examined is the concept of fraud. Fraud can be defined in many ways,
but for the purposes of this course we define it as the act of intentionally deceiving a person or organization or
misrepresenting a relationship in order to secure some type of benefit, either financial or nonfinancial. We
initially discuss it in a broader sense and then concentrate on the issue of fraud as it relates to the accounting
environment and profession.
Workplace fraud is typically detected by anonymous tips or by accident, so many companies use the fraud
triangle to help in the analysis of workplace fraud. Donald Cressey, an American criminologist and sociologist,
developed the fraud triangle to help explain why law-abiding citizens sometimes commit serious workplacerelated crimes. He determined that people who embezzled money from banks were typically otherwise lawabiding citizens who came into a “non-sharable financial problem.” A non-sharable financial problem is when
a trusted individual has a financial issue or problem that he or she feels can't be shared. However, it is felt that
the problem can be alleviated by surreptitiously violating the position of trust through some type of illegal
response, such as embezzlement or other forms of misappropriation. The guilty party is typically able to
rationalize the illegal action. Although they committed serious financial crimes, for many of them, it was their
first offense.
The fraud triangle consists of three elements: incentive, opportunity, and rationalization (Figure 8.2). When an
employee commits fraud, the elements of the fraud triangle provide assistance in understanding the
employee’s methods and rationale. Each of the elements needs to be present for workplace fraud to occur.

1 National Restaurant Association. “2016 Restaurant Operations Report.” 2016. https://www.restaurant.org/research/reports/restaurantoperations-report

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

Figure 8.2

533

Fraud Triangle. The three components identified in the fraud triangle are perceived opportunity,

incentive, and rationalization. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Perceived opportunity is when a potential fraudster thinks that the internal controls are weak or sees a way to
override them. This is the area in which an accountant has the greatest ability to mitigate fraud, as the
accountant can review and test internal controls to locate weaknesses. After identifying a weak, circumvented,
or nonexistent internal control, management, along with the accountant, can implement stronger internal
controls.
Rationalization is a way for the potential fraudster to internalize the concept that the fraudulent actions are
acceptable. A typical fraudster finds ways to personally justify his or her illegal and unethical behavior. Using
rationalization as a tool to locate or combat fraud is difficult, because the outward signs may be difficult to
recognize.
Incentive (or pressure) is another element necessary for a person to commit fraud. The different types of
pressure are typically found in (1) vices, such as gambling or drug use; (2) financial pressures, such as greed or
living beyond their means; (3) work pressure, such as being unhappy with a job; and (4) other pressures, such
as the desire to appear successful. Pressure may be more recognizable than rationalization, for instance, when
coworkers seem to be living beyond their means or complain that they want to get even with their employer
because of low pay or other perceived slights.
Typically, all three elements of the triangle must be in place for an employee to commit fraud, but companies
usually focus on the opportunity aspect of mitigating fraud because, they can develop internal controls to
manage the risk. The rationalization and pressure to commit fraud are harder to understand and identify.
Many organizations may recognize that an employee may be under pressure, but many times the signs of
pressure are missed.
Virtually all types of businesses can fall victim to fraudulent behavior. For example, there have been scams
involving grain silos in Texas inflating their inventory, the sale of mixed oils labeled as olive oil across the
globe, and the tens of billions of dollars that Bernie Madoff swindled out of investors and not-for-profits.
To demonstrate how a fraud can occur, let’s examine a sample case in a little more detail. In 2015, a long-term
employee of the SCICAP Federal Credit Union in Iowa was convicted of stealing over $2.7 million in cash over a
37-year period. The employee maintained two sets of financial records: one that provided customers with

534

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

correct information as to how much money they had on deposit within their account, and a second set of
books that, through a complex set of transactions, moved money out of customer accounts and into the
employee’s account as well as those of members of her family. To ensure that no other employee within the
small credit union would have access to the duplicate set of books, the employee never took a vacation over
the 37-year period, and she was the only employee with password-protected access to the system where the
electronic records were stored.
There were, at least, two obvious violations of solid internal control principles in this case. The first was the
failure to require more than one person to have access to the records, which the employee was able to
maintain by not taking a vacation. Allowing the employee to not share the password-protected access was a
second violation. If more than one employee had access to the system, the felonious employee probably
would have been caught much earlier. What other potential failures in the internal control system might have
been present? How does this example of fraud exhibit the three components of the fraud triangle?
Unfortunately, this is one of many examples that occur on a daily basis. In almost any city on almost any day,
there are articles in local newspapers about a theft from a company by its employees. Although these thefts
can involve assets such as inventory, most often, employee theft involves cash that the employee has access to
as part of his or her day-to-day job.

LINK TO LEARNING
Small businesses have few employees, but often they have certain employees who are trusted with
responsibilities that may not have complete internal control systems. This situation makes small
businesses especially vulnerable to fraud. The article “Small Business Fraud and the Trusted Employee”
from the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (https://openstax.org/l/50ACFEFraud) describes how a
trusted employee may come to commit fraud, and how a small business can prevent it from happening.

Accountants, and other members of the management team, are in a good position to control the perceived
opportunity side of the fraud triangle through good internal controls, which are policies and procedures used
by management and accountants of a company to protect assets and maintain proper and efficient operations
within a company with the intent to minimize fraud. An internal auditor is an employee of an organization
whose job is to provide an independent and objective evaluation of the company’s accounting and operational
activities. Management typically reviews the recommendations and implements stronger internal controls.
Another important role is that of an external auditor, who generally works for an outside certified public
accountant (CPA) firm or his or her own private practice and conducts audits and other assignments, such as
reviews. Importantly, the external auditor is not an employee of the client. The external auditor prepares
reports and then provides opinions as to whether or not the financial statements accurately reflect the
financial conditions of the company, subject to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). External
auditors can maintain their own practice, or they might be employed by national or regional firms.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

535

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Internal Auditors and Their Code of Ethics
Internal auditors are employees of an organization who evaluate internal controls and other operational
metrics, and then ethically report their findings to management. An internal auditor may be a Certified
Internal Auditor (CIA), an accreditation granted by the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA). The IIA defines
internal auditing as “an independent, objective assurance and consulting activity designed to add value
and improve an organization’s operations. It helps an organization accomplish its objectives by bringing
a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management,
control, and governance processes.”

[2]

Internal auditors have their own organizational code of ethics. According to the IIA, “the purpose of The
Institute’s Code of Ethics is to promote an ethical culture in the profession of internal auditing.”

[3]

Company management relies on a disciplined and truthful approach to reporting. The internal auditor is
expected to keep confidential any received information, while reporting results in an objective fashion.
Management trusts internal auditors to perform their work in a competent manner and with integrity, so
that the company can make the best decisions moving forward.

One of the issues faced by any organization is that internal control systems can be overridden and can be
ineffective if not followed by management or employees. The use of internal controls in both accounting and
operations can reduce the risk of fraud. In the unfortunate event that an organization is a victim of fraud, the
internal controls should provide tools that can be used to identify who is responsible for the fraud and provide
evidence that can be used to prosecute the individual responsible for the fraud. This chapter discusses internal
controls in the context of accounting and controlling for cash in a typical business setting. These examples are
applicable to the other ways in which an organization may protect its assets and protect itself against fraud.
8.2

Define and Explain Internal Controls and Their Purpose within an

Organization
Internal controls are the systems used by an organization to manage risk and diminish the occurrence of
fraud. The internal control structure is made up of the control environment, the accounting system, and
procedures called control activities. Several years ago, the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO),
which is an independent, private-sector group whose five sponsoring organizations periodically identify and
address specific accounting issues or projects, convened to address the issue of internal control deficiencies in
the operations and accounting systems of organizations. They subsequently published a report that is known
as COSO’s Internal Control-Integrated Framework. The five components that they determined were necessary in
an effective internal control system make up the components in the internal controls triangle shown in
Figure 8.3.

2 The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA). “Code of Ethics.” n.d. https://na.theiia.org/standards-guidance/mandatory-guidance/Pages/Codeof-Ethics.aspx
3 The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA). “Code of Ethics.” n.d. https://na.theiia.org/standards-guidance/mandatory-guidance/Pages/Codeof-Ethics.aspx

536

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

Figure 8.3

The Internal Control Environment. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-

NC-SA 4.0 license)
Here we address some of the practical aspects of internal control systems. The internal control system consists
of the formal policies and procedures that do the following:
• ensure assets are properly used
• ensure that the accounting system is functioning properly
• monitor operations of the organization to ensure maximum efficiency
• ensure that assets are kept secure
• ensure that employees are in compliance with corporate policies
A properly designed and functioning internal control system will not eliminate the risk of loss, but it will reduce
the risk.
Different organizations face different types of risk, but when internal control systems are lacking, the
opportunity arises for fraud, misuse of the organization’s assets, and employee or workplace corruption. Part
of an accountant’s function is to understand and assist in maintaining the internal control in the organization.

LINK TO LEARNING
See the Institute of Internal Auditors website (https://openstax.org/l/50IIA) to learn more about many of
the professional functions of the internal auditor.

Internal control keeps the assets of a company safe and keeps the company from violating any laws, while
fairly recording the financial activity of the company in the accounting records. Proper accounting records are
used to create the financial statements that the owners use to evaluate the operations of a company, including
all company and employee activities. Internal controls are more than just reviews of how items are recorded in
the company’s accounting records; they also include comparing the accounting records to the actual
operations of the company.
For example, a movie theater earns most of its profits from the sale of popcorn and soda at the concession
stand. The prices of the items sold at the concession stand are typically high, even though the costs of popcorn
and soda are low. Internal controls allow the owners to ensure that their employees do not give away the
profits by giving away sodas and popcorn.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

537

If you were to go to the concession stand and ask for a cup of water, typically, the employee would give you a
clear, small plastic cup called a courtesy cup. This internal control, the small plastic cup for nonpaying
customers, helps align the accounting system and the theater’s operations. A movie theater does not use a
system to directly account for the sale of popcorn, soda, or ice used. Instead, it accounts for the containers. A
point-of-sale system compares the number of soda cups used in a shift to the number of sales recorded in the
system to ensure that those numbers match. The same process accounts for popcorn buckets and other
containers. Providing a courtesy cup ensures that customers drinking free water do not use the soda cups that
would require a corresponding sale to appear in the point-of-sale system. The cost of the popcorn, soda, and
ice will be recorded in the accounting system as an inventory item, but the internal control is the comparison
of the recorded sales to the number of containers used. This is just one type of internal control. As we discuss
the internal controls, we see that the internal controls are used both in accounting, to provide information for
management to properly evaluate the operations of the company, and in business operations, to reduce fraud.
It should be clear how important internal control is to all businesses, regardless of size. An effective internal
control system allows a business to monitor its employees, but it also helps a company protect sensitive
customer data. Consider the 2017 massive data breach at Equifax that compromised data of over 143 million
people. With proper internal controls functioning as intended, there would have been protective measures to
ensure that no unauthorized parties had access to the data. Not only would internal controls prevent outside
access to the data, but proper internal controls would protect the data from corruption, damage, or misuse.

YOUR TURN
Bank Fraud in Enid, Oklahoma
The retired mayor of Enid, Oklahoma, Ernst Currier, had a job as a loan officer and then as a senior vice
president at Security National Bank. In his bank job, he allegedly opened 61 fraudulent loans. He used
the identities of at least nine real people as well as eight fictitious people and stole about $6.2 million.

[4]

He was sentenced to 13 years in prison on 33 felony counts.
Currier was able to circumvent one of the most important internal controls: segregation of duties. The
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) states that segregation of duties “is based on
shared responsibilities of a key process that disperses the critical functions of that process to more than
one person or department. Without this separation in key processes, fraud and error risks are far less
manageable.”

[5]

Currier used local residents’ identities and created false documents to open loans for

millions of dollars and then collect the funds himself, without any oversight by any other employee.
Creating these loans allowed him to walk up to the bank vault and take cash out of the bank without
anyone questioning him. There was no segregation of duties for opening loans, or if there was, he was
able to easily override those internal controls.
How could internal controls have helped prevent Currier’s bank fraud in Enid, Oklahoma?
Solution
Simply having someone else confirm the existence of the borrower and make the payment for the loan
directly to the borrower would have saved this small bank millions of dollars.

4 Jack Money. “Fraudulent Loans Lead to Enid Banker’s Arrest on Numerous Felony Complaints.” The Oklahoman. November 15, 2017.
https://newsok.com/article/5572195/fraudulent-loans-lead-to-enid-bankers-arrest-on-numerous-felony-complaints
5 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). “Segregation of Duties.” n.d. https://www.aicpa.org/interestareas/
informationtechnology/resources/value-strategy-through-segregation-of-duties.html

538

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

Consider a bank that has to track deposits for thousands of customers. If a fire destroys the building housing
the bank’s servers, how can the bank find the balances of each customer? Typically, organizations such as
banks mirror their servers at several locations around the world as an internal control. The bank might have a
main server in Tennessee but also mirror all data in real time to identical servers in Arizona, Montana, and
even offshore in Iceland. With multiple copies of a server at multiple locations across the country, or even the
world, in the event of disaster to one server, a backup server can take control of operations, protecting
customer data and avoiding any service interruptions.
Internal controls are the basic components of an internal control system, the sum of all internal controls
and policies within an organization that protect assets and data. A properly designed system of internal
controls aims to ensure the integrity of assets, allows for reliable accounting information and financial
reporting, enhances efficiency within an organization, and provides guidelines and possible consequences for
dealing with breaches. Internal controls drive many decisions and overall operational procedures within an
organization. A properly designed internal control system will not prevent all loss from occurring, but it will
significantly reduce the risk of loss and increase the chance of identifying the responsible party.

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Fraud Controls for Grocery Stores
All businesses are concerned with internal controls over reporting and assets. For the grocery industry
this concern is even greater, because profit margins on items are so small that any lost opportunity hurts
profitability. How can an individual grocery store develop effective controls?
Consider the two biggest items that a grocery store needs to control: food (inventory) and cash.
Inventory controls are set up to stop shrinkage (theft). While it is not profitable for each aisle to be
patrolled by a security guard, cameras throughout the store linked to a central location allow security
staff to observe customers. More controls are placed on cash registers to prevent employees from
stealing cash. Cameras at each register, cash counts at each shift change, and/or a supervisor who
observes cashiers are some potential internal control methods. Grocery stores invest more resources in
controlling cash because they have determined it to be the greatest opportunity for fraudulent activity.

The Role of Internal Controls
The accounting system is the backbone of any business entity, whether it is profit based or not. It is the
responsibility of management to link the accounting system with other functional areas of the business and
ensure that there is communication among employees, managers, customers, suppliers, and all other internal
and external users of financial information. With a proper understanding of internal controls, management
can design an internal control system that promotes a positive business environment that can most effectively
serve its customers.
For example, a customer enters a retail store to purchase a pair of jeans. As the cashier enters the jeans into
the point-of-sale system, the following events occur internally:
1. A sale is recorded in the company’s journal, which increases revenue on the income statement. If the
transaction occurred by credit card, the bank typically transfers the funds into the store’s bank account in
a timely manner.
2. The pair of jeans is removed from the inventory of the store where the purchase was made.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

539

3. A new pair of jeans is ordered from the distribution center to replace what was purchased from the
store’s inventory.
4. The distribution center orders a new pair of jeans from the factory to replace its inventory.
5. Marketing professionals can monitor over time the trend and volume of jeans sold in a specific size. If an
increase or decrease in sales volume of a specific size is noted, store inventory levels can be adjusted.
6. The company can see in real time the exact inventory levels of all products in all stores at all times, and
this can ensure the best customer access to products.
Because many systems are linked through technology that drives decisions made by many stakeholders inside
and outside of the organization, internal controls are needed to protect the integrity and ensure the flow of
information. An internal control system also assists all stakeholders of an organization to develop an
understanding of the organization and provide assurance that all assets are being used efficiently and
accurately.

Environment Leading to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Internal controls have grown in their importance as a component of most business decisions. This importance
has grown as many company structures have grown in complexity. Despite their importance, not all
companies have given maintenance of controls top priority. Additionally, many small businesses do not have
adequate understanding of internal controls and therefore use inferior internal control systems. Many large
companies have nonformalized processes, which can lead to systems that are not as efficient as they could be.
The failure of the SCICAP Credit Union discussed earlier is a direct result of a small financial institution having
a substandard internal control system leading to employee theft. One of the largest corporate failures of all
time was Enron, and the failure can be directly attributed to poor internal controls.
Enron was one of the largest energy companies in the world in the late twentieth century. However, a corrupt
management attempted to hide weak financial performance by manipulating revenue recognition, valuation
of assets on the balance sheet, and other financial reporting disclosures so that the company appeared to
have significant growth. When this practice was uncovered, the owners of Enron stock lost $40 billion as the
stock price dropped from $91 per share to less than $1 per share, as shown in Figure 8.4.

[6]

This failure could

have been prevented had proper internal controls been in place.
For example, Enron and its accounting firm, Arthur Andersen, did not maintain an adequate degree of
independence. Arthur Andersen provided a significant amount of services in both auditing and consulting,
which prevented them from approaching the audit of Enron with a proper degree of independence. Also,
among many other violations, Enron avoided the proper use of several acceptable reporting requirements.

6 Douglas O. Linder, ed. “Enron Historical Stock Price.” Famous Trials. n.d. https://www.famous-trials.com/images/ftrials/Enron/documents/
enronstockchart.pdf

540

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

Figure 8.4

Change in Enron Stock Price. The Enron scandal was one of the largest frauds in the history of

modern business. It was the main fraud that was responsible for creation of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act as well as
the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
As a result of the Enron failure and others that occurred during the same time frame, Congress passed the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) to regulate practice to manage conflicts of analysts, maintain governance, and
impose guidelines for criminal conduct as well as sanctions for violations of conduct. It ensures that internal
controls are properly documented, tested, and used consistently. The intent of the act was to ensure that
corporate financial statements and disclosures are accurate and reliable. It is important to note that SOX only
applies to public companies. A publicly traded company is one whose stock is traded (bought and sold) on an
organized stock exchange. Smaller companies still struggle with internal control development and compliance
due to a variety of reasons, such as cost and lack of resources.

Major Accounting Components of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
As it pertains to internal controls, the SOX requires the certification and documentation of internal controls.
Specifically, the act requires that the auditor do the following:
1. Issue an internal control report following the evaluation of internal controls.
2. Limit nonaudit services, such as consulting, that are provided to a client.
3. Rotate who can lead the audit. The person in charge of the audit can serve for a period of no longer than
seven years without a break of two years.
Additionally, the work conducted by the auditor is to be overseen by the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (PCAOB). The PCAOB is a congressionally established, nonprofit corporation. Its creation
was included in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 to regulate conflict, control disclosures, and set sanction
guidelines for any violation of regulations. The PCAOB was assigned the responsibilities of ensuring
independent, accurate, and informative audit reports, monitoring the audits of securities brokers and dealers,
and maintaining oversight of the accountants and accounting firms that audit publicly traded companies.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

541

LINK TO LEARNING
Visit the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) website (https://openstax.org/l/
50PCAOB) to learn more about what it does.

Any employee found to violate SOX standards can be subject to very harsh penalties, including $5 million in
fines and up to 20 to 25 years in prison. The penalty is more severe for securities fraud (25 years) than for mail
or wire fraud (20 years).
The SOX is relatively long and detailed, with Section 404 having the most application to internal controls.
Under Section 404, management of a company must perform annual audits to assess and document the
effectiveness of all internal controls that have an impact on the financial reporting of the organization. Also,
selected executives of the firm under audit must sign the audit report and state that they attest that the audit
fairly represents the financial records and conditions of the company.
The financial reports and internal control system must be audited annually. The cost to comply with this act is
very high, and there is debate as to how effective this regulation is. Two primary arguments that have been
made against the SOX requirements is that complying with their requirements is expensive, both in terms of
cost and workforce, and the results tend not to be conclusive. Proponents of the SOX requirements do not
accept these arguments.
One available potential response to mandatory SOX compliance is for a company to decertify (remove) its
stock for trade on the available stock exchanges. Since SOX affects publicly traded companies, decertifying its
stock would eliminate the SOX compliance requirement. However, this has not proven to be a viable option,
primarily because investors enjoy the protection SOX provides, especially the requirement that the companies
in which they invest undergo a certified audit prepared by CPAs employed by national or regional accounting
firms. Also, if a company takes its stock off of an organized stock exchange, many investors assume that a
company is in trouble financially and that it wants to avoid an audit that might detect its problems.

YOUR TURN
The Growing Importance of the Report on Internal Controls
Internal controls have become an important aspect of financial reporting. As part of the financial
statements, the auditor has to issue a report with an opinion on the financial statements, as well as
internal controls. Use the internet and locate the annual report of a company, specifically the report on
internal controls. What does this report tell the user of financial information?
Solution
The annual report informs the user about the financial results of the company, both in discussion by
management as well as the financial statements. Part of the financial statements involves an
independent auditor’s report on the integrity of the financial statements as well as the internal controls.

542

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

LINK TO LEARNING
Many companies have their own internal auditors on staff. The role of the internal auditor is to test and
ensure that a company has proper internal controls in place, and that they are functioning. Read about
how the internal audit works from I.S. Partners (https://openstax.org/l/50ISPartAudit) to learn more.

8.3

Describe Internal Controls within an Organization

The use of internal controls differs significantly across organizations of different sizes. In the case of small
businesses, implementation of internal controls can be a challenge, due to cost constraints, or because a small
staff may mean that one manager or owner will have full control over the organization and its operations. An
owner in charge of all functions has enough knowledge to keep a close eye on all aspects of the organization
and can track all assets appropriately. In smaller organizations in which responsibilities are delegated,
procedures need to be developed in order to ensure that assets are tracked and used properly.
When an owner cannot have full oversight and control over an organization, internal control systems need to
be developed. When an appropriate internal control system is in place, it is interlinked to all aspects of the
entity’s operations. An appropriate internal control system links the accounting, finance, operations, human
resources, marketing, and sales departments within an organization. It is important that the management
team, as well as employees, recognize the importance of internal controls and their role in preventing losses,
monitoring performance, and planning for the future.

Elements of Internal Control
A strong internal control system is based on the same consistent elements:
• establishment of clear responsibilities
• proper documentation
• adequate insurance
• separation of assets from custody
• separation of duties
• use of technology

Establishment of Clear Responsibilities
A properly designed system of internal control clearly dictates responsibility for certain roles within an
organization. When there is a clear statement of responsibility, issues that are uncovered can be easily traced
and responsibility placed where it belongs.
As an example, imagine that you are the manager of the Galaxy’s Best Yogurt. On any shift, you have three
employees working in the store. One employee is designated as the shift supervisor who oversees the
operations of the other two employees on the shift and ensures that the store is presented and functioning
properly. Of the other two employees, one may be solely responsible for management of the cash register,
while the others serve the customers. When only one employee has access to an individual cash register, if

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

543

there is an overage or shortage of cash, it can be traced to the one employee who is in charge of the cash
register.

Proper Documentation
An effective internal control system maintains proper documentation, including backups, to trace all
transactions. The documentation can be paper copies, or documents that are computer generated and stored,
on flash drives or in the cloud, for example. Given the possibility of some type of natural (tornado or flood) or
man-made (arson) disasters, even the most basic of businesses should create backup copies of documentation
that are stored off-site.
In addition, any documentation generated by daily operations should be managed according to internal
controls. For example, when the Galaxy’s Best Yogurt closes each day, one employee should close out and
reconcile the cash drawer using prenumbered forms in pen to ensure that no forms can be altered or changed
by another employee who may have access to the cash. In case of an error, the employee responsible for
making the change should initial any changes on the form. If there are special orders for cakes or other
products, the order forms should be prenumbered. The use of prenumbered documents provides assurance
that all sales are recorded. If a form is not prenumbered, an order can be prepared, and the employee can
then take the money without ringing the order into the cash register, leaving no record of the sale.

Adequate Insurance
Insurance may be a significant cost to an organization (especially liability coverage), but it is necessary. With
adequate insurance on an asset, if it is lost or destroyed, an outside party will recoup the company for the loss.
If assets are lost to fraud or theft, an insurance company will investigate the loss and will press criminal
charges against any employee found to be involved. Very often, the employer will be hesitant to pursue
criminal charges against an employee due to the risk of lawsuit or bad publicity. For example, an employee
might assume that the termination was age related and is going to sue the company. Also, there might be a
situation where the company experienced a loss, such as theft, and it does not want to let the general public
know that there are potential deficiencies in its security system.
If the insurance company presses charges on behalf of the company, this protects the organization and also
acts as a deterrent if employees know that the insurance company will always prosecute theft. For example,
suppose the manager of the Galaxy’s Best Yogurt stole $10,000 cash over a period of two years. The owner of
the yogurt store will most likely file an insurance claim to recover the $10,000 that was stolen. With proper
insurance, the insurance company will reimburse the yogurt store for the money but then has the right to
press charges and recover its losses from the employee who was caught stealing. The store owner will have no
control over the insurance company’s efforts to recover the $10,000 and will likely be forced to fire the
employee in order to keep the insurance policy.

Separation of Assets from Custody
Separation of assets from custody ensures that the person who controls an asset cannot also keep the
accounting records. This action prevents one employee from taking income from the business and entering a
transaction on the accounting records to cover it up. For example, one person within an organization may
open an envelope that contains a check, but a different person would enter the check into the organization’s
accounting system. In the case of the Galaxy’s Best Yogurt, one employee may count the money in the cash
register drawer at the end of the night and reconcile it with the sales, but a different employee would recount

544

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

the money, prepare the bank deposit, and ensure that the deposit is made at the bank.

Separation of Duties
A properly designed internal control system assures that at least two (if not more) people are involved with
most transactions. The purpose of separating duties is to ensure that there is a check and balance in place.
One common internal control is to have one employee place an inventory order and a different employee
receive the order as it is delivered. For example, assume that an employee at the Galaxy’s Best Yogurt places
an inventory order. In addition to the needed inventory, the employee orders an extra box of piecrusts. If that
employee also receives the order, he or she can take the piecrusts home, and the store will still pay for them.
Check signing is another important aspect of separation of duties. Typically, the person who writes a check
should not also sign the check. Additionally, the person who places supply orders should not write checks to
pay the bills for these supplies.

Use of Technology
Technology has made the process of internal control simpler and more approachable to all businesses. There
are two reasons that the use of technology has become more prevalent. The first is the development of more
user-friendly equipment, and the second is the reduction in costs of security resources. In the past, if a
company wanted a security system, it often had to go to an outside security firm, and the costs of providing
and monitoring the system were prohibitive for many small businesses. Currently, security systems have
become relatively inexpensive, and not only do many small businesses now have them, they are now
commonly used by residential homeowners.
In terms of the application of security resources, some businesses use surveillance cameras focused on key
areas of the organization, such as the cash register and areas where a majority of work is performed.
Technology also allows businesses to use password protection on their data or systems so that employees
cannot access systems and change data without authorization. Businesses may also track all employee
activities within an information technology system.
Even if a business uses all of the elements of a strong internal control system, the system is only as good as
the oversight. As responsibilities, staffing, and even technology change, internal control systems need to be
constantly reviewed and refined. Internal control reviews are typically not conducted by inside management
but by internal auditors who provide an impartial perspective of where controls are working and where they
can be improved.

Purposes of Internal Controls within a Governmental Entity
Internal controls apply not only to public and private corporations but also to governmental entities. Often, a
government controls one of the most important assets of modern times: data. Unprotected financial
information, including tax data, social security, and governmental identifications, could lead to identity theft
and could even provide rogue nations access to data that could compromise the security of our country.
Governmental entities require their contractors to have proper internal controls and to maintain proper codes
of ethics.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

545

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Ethics in Governmental Contractors
Government entities are not the only organizations required to implement proper internal controls and
codes of ethics. As part of the business relationship between different organizations, governmental
agencies also require contractors and their subcontractors to implement internal controls to ensure
compliance with proper ethical conduct. The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) Council outlines
regulations under FAR 3.10,

[7]

which require governmental contractors and their subcontractors to

implement a written “Contractor Code of Business Ethics and Conduct,” and the proper internal controls
to ensure that the code of ethics is followed. An employee training program, posting of agency inspector
general hotline posters, and an internal control system to promote compliance with the established
ethics code are also required. Contractors must disclose violations of federal criminal law involving fraud,
conflicts of interest, bribery, or gratuity violations; violations of the civil False Claims Act; and significant
overpayments on a contract not resulting from contract financing payments.

[8]

Such internal controls

help ensure that an organization and its business relationships are properly managed.

To recognize the significant need for internal controls within the government, and to ensure and enforce
compliance, the US Government Accountability Office (GAO) has its own standards for internal control within
the federal government. All government agencies are subject to governance under these standards, and one
of the objectives of the GAO is to provide audits on agencies to ensure that proper controls are in place and
within compliance. Standards for internal control within the federal government are located within a
publication referred to as the “Green Book,” or Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government.

LINK TO LEARNING
Government organizations have their own needs for internal controls. Read the GAO “Green Book”
(https://openstax.org/l/50GAOGreenBook) to learn more about these internal control procedures.

Purposes of Internal Controls within a Not-for-Profit
Not-for-profit (NFP) organizations have the same needs for internal control as many traditional for-profit
entities. At the same time, there are unique challenges that these entities face. Based on the objectives and
charters of NFP organizations, in many cases, those who run the organizations are volunteers. As volunteers,
leaders of NFPs may not have the same training background and qualifications as those in a similar for-profit
position. Additionally, a volunteer leader often splits time between the organization and a full-time career. For
these reasons, internal controls in an NFP often are not properly implemented, and there may be a greater risk
of control lapse. A control lapse occurs when there is a deviation from standard control protocol that leads to

7 Federal Acquisition Regulation. “Subpart 3.10: Contractor Code of Business Ethics and Conduct.” January 22, 2019.
https://www.acquisition.gov/content/subpart-310-contractor-code-business-ethics-and-conduct
8 National Contract Management Association. https://www.ncmahq.org/

546

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

a failure in the internal control and/or fraud prevention processes or systems. A failure occurs in a situation
when results did not achieve predetermined goals or meet expectations.
Not-for-profit organizations have an extra category of finances that need protection, in addition to their
assets. They need to ensure that incoming donations are used as intended. For example, many colleges and
universities are classified as NFP organizations, and donations are a significant source of revenue. However,
donations are often directed to a specific source. For example, suppose an alumnus of Alpha University wants
to make a $1,000,000 donation to the business school for undergraduate student scholarships. Internal
controls would track that donation to ensure it paid for scholarships for undergraduate students in the
business school and was not used for any other purpose at the school, in order to avoid potential legal issues.

Identify and Apply Principles of Internal Controls to the Receipt and Disbursement of
Cash
Cash can be a major part of many business operations. Imagine a Las Vegas casino, or a large grocery store,
such as Publix Super Markets, Wegmans Food Markets, or ShopRite; in any of these settings, millions of dollars
in cash can change hands within a matter of minutes, and it can pass through the hands of thousands of
employees. Internal controls ensure that all of this cash reaches the bank account of the business entity. The
first control is monitoring. Not only are cameras strategically placed throughout the store to prevent
shoplifting and crime by customers, but cameras are also located over all areas where cash changes hands,
such as over every cash register, or in a casino over every gaming table. These cameras are constantly
monitored, often offsite at a central location by personnel who have no relationship with the employees who
handle the cash, and all footage is recorded. This close monitoring makes it more difficult for misuse of cash to
occur.
Additionally, access to cash is tightly controlled. Within a grocery store, each employee has his or her own cash
drawer with a set amount of cash. At any time, any employee can reconcile the sales recorded within the
system to the cash balance that should be in the drawer. If access to the drawer is restricted to one employee,
that employee is responsible when cash is missing. If one specific employee is consistently short on cash, the
company can investigate and monitor the employee closely to determine if the shortages are due to theft or if
they are accidental, such as if they resulted from errors in counting change. Within a casino, each time a
transaction occurs and when there is a shift change for the dealers, cash is counted in real time. Casino
employees dispersed on the gaming floor are constantly monitoring play, in addition to those monitoring
cameras behind the scenes.
Technology plays a major role in the maintenance of internal controls, but other principles are also important.
If an employee makes a mistake involving cash, such as making an error in a transaction on a cash register,
the employee who made the mistake typically cannot correct the mistake. In most cases, a manager must
review the mistake and clear it before any adjustments are made. These changes are logged to ensure that
managers are not clearing mistakes for specific employees in a pattern that could signify collusion, which is
considered to be a private cooperation or agreement primarily for a deceitful, illegal, or immoral cause or
purpose. Duties are also separated to count cash on hand and ensure records are accurate. Often, at the end
of the shift, a manager or employee other than the person responsible for the cash is responsible for counting
cash on hand within the cash drawer. For example, at a grocery store, it is common for an employee who has
been checking out customers for a shift to then count the money in the register and prepare a document
providing the counts for the shift. This employee then submits the counted tray to a supervisor, such as a head
cashier, who then repeats the counting and documentation process. The two counts should be equal. If there
is a discrepancy, it should immediately be investigated. If the store accepts checks and credit/debit card

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

547

payments, these methods of payments are also incorporated into the verification process.
In many cases, the sales have also been documented either by a paper tape or by a computerized system. The
ultimate goal is to determine if the cash, checks, and credit/debit card transactions equal the amount of sales
for the shift. For example, if the shift’s register had sales of $800, then the documentation of counted cash and
checks, plus the credit/debit card documentation should also add up to $800.
Despite increased use of credit cards by consumers, our economy is still driven by cash. As cash plays a very
important role in society, efforts must be taken to control it and ensure that it makes it to the proper areas
within an organization. The cost of developing, maintaining, and monitoring internal controls is significant but
important. Considering the millions of dollars of cash that can pass through the hands of employees on any
given day, the high cost can be well worth it to protect the flow of cash within an organization.

LINK TO LEARNING
Internal controls are as important for not-for-profit businesses as they are within the for-profit sector.
See this guide for not-for-profit businesses to set up and maintain proper internal control systems
(https://openstax.org/l/50IntConNonProf) provided by the National Council of Nonprofits.

THINK IT THROUGH
Hiring Approved Vendors
One internal control that companies often have is an official “approved vendor” list for purchases. Why is
it important to have an approved vendor list?

8.4

Define the Purpose and Use of a Petty Cash Fund, and Prepare Petty

Cash Journal Entries
As we have discussed, one of the hardest assets to control within any organization is cash. One way to control
cash is for an organization to require that all payments be made by check. However, there are situations in
which it is not practical to use a check. For example, imagine that the Galaxy’s Best Yogurt runs out of milk one
evening. It is not possible to operate without milk, and the normal shipment does not come from the supplier
for another 48 hours. To maintain operations, it becomes necessary to go to the grocery store across the
street and purchase three gallons of milk. It is not efficient for time and cost to write a check for this small
purchase, so companies set up a petty cash fund, which is a predetermined amount of cash held on hand to
be used to make payments for small day-to-day purchases. A petty cash fund is a type of imprest account,
which means that it contains a fixed amount of cash that is replaced as it is spent in order to maintain a set
balance.
To maintain internal controls, managers can use a petty cash receipt (Figure 8.5), which tracks the use of the
cash and requires a signature from the manager.

548

Figure 8.5

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

Petty Cash Voucher. A petty cash voucher is an important internal control document to trace the

use of cash within a petty cash fund. This voucher allows management to track the use of cash, the balance
that should be within the account, and the person responsible for the approval of a payment from the account.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
As cash is spent from a petty cash fund, it is replaced with a receipt of the purchase. At all times, the balance in
the petty cash box should be equal to the cash in the box plus the receipts showing purchases.
For example, the Galaxy’s Best Yogurt maintains a petty cash box with a stated balance of $75 at all times.
Upon review of the box, the balance is counted in the following way.

Because there may not always be a manager with check signing privileges available to sign a check for
unexpected expenses, a petty cash account allows employees to make small and necessary purchases to
support the function of a business when it is not practical to go through the formal expense process. In all
cases, the amount of the purchase using petty cash would be considered to not be material in nature. Recall
that materiality means that the dollar amount in question would have a significant impact in financial results
or influence investor decisions.

Demonstration of Typical Petty Cash Journal Entries
Petty cash accounts are managed through a series of journal entries. Entries are needed to (1) establish the
fund, (2) increase or decrease the balance of the fund (replenish the fund as cash is used), and (3) adjust for
overages and shortages of cash. Consider the following example.
The Galaxy’s Best Yogurt establishes a petty cash fund on July 1 by cashing a check for $75 from its checking
account and placing cash in the petty cash box. At this point, the petty cash box has $75 to be used for small
expenses with the authorization of the responsible manager. The journal entry to establish the petty cash fund
would be as follows.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

549

As this petty cash fund is established, the account titled “Petty Cash” is created; this is an asset on the balance
sheet of many small businesses. In this case, the cash account, which includes checking accounts, is decreased,
while the funds are moved to the petty cash account. One asset is increasing, while another asset is decreasing
by the same account. Since the petty cash account is an imprest account, this balance will never change and
will remain on the balance sheet at $75, unless management elects to change the petty cash balance.
Throughout the month, several payments are made from the petty cash account of the Galaxy’s Best Yogurt.
Assume the following activities.

At the end of July, in the petty cash box there should be a receipt for the postage stamp purchase, a receipt for
the milk, a receipt for the window cleaner, and the remaining cash. The employee in charge of the petty cash
box should sign each receipt when the purchase is made. The total amount of purchases from the receipts
($45), plus the remaining cash in the box should total $75. As the receipts are reviewed, the box must be
replenished for what was spent during the month. The journal entry to replenish the petty cash account will be
as follows.

Typically, petty cash accounts are reimbursed at a fixed time period. Many small businesses will do this
monthly, which ensures that the expenses are recognized within the proper accounting period. In the event
that all of the cash in the account is used before the end of the established time period, it can be replenished
in the same way at any time more cash is needed. If the petty cash account often needs to be replenished
before the end of the accounting period, management may decide to increase the cash balance in the account.
If, for example, management of the Galaxy’s Best Yogurt decides to increase the petty cash balance to $100
from the current balance of $75, the journal entry to do this on August 1 would be as follows.

550

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

If the management at a later date decides to decrease the balance in the petty cash account, the previous
entry would be reversed, with cash being debited and petty cash being credited.
Occasionally, errors may occur that affect the balance of the petty cash account. This may be the result of an
employee not getting a receipt or getting back incorrect change from the store where the purchase was made.
In this case, an expense is created that creates a cash overage or shortage.
Consider Galaxy’s expenses for July. During the month, $45 was spent on expenses. If the balance in the petty
cash account is supposed to be $75, then the petty cash box should contain $45 in signed receipts and $30 in
cash. Assume that when the box is counted, there are $45 in receipts and $25 in cash. In this case, the petty
cash balance is $70, when it should be $75. This creates a $5 shortage that needs to be replaced from the
checking account. The entry to record a cash shortage is as follows.

When there is a shortage of cash, we record the shortage as a “debit” and this has the same effect as an
expense. If we have an overage of cash, we record the overage as a credit, and this has the same impact as if
we are recording revenue. If there were cash overage, the petty cash account would be debited and the cash
over and short account would be credited. In this case, the expense balance decreases, and the year-end
balance is the net balance from all overages and shortages during the year.
If a petty cash account is consistently short, this may be a warning sign that there is not a proper control of the
account, and management may want to consider additional controls to better monitor petty cash.

THINK IT THROUGH
Cash versus Debit Card
A petty cash system in some businesses may be replaced by use of a prepaid credit card (or debit card)
on site. What would be the pros and cons of actually maintaining cash on premises for the petty cash
system, versus a rechargeable debit card that employees may use for petty cash purposes? Which option
would you select for your petty cash account if you were the owner of a small business?

LINK TO LEARNING
See this article on tips for companies to establish and manage petty cash systems (https://openstax.org/
l/50IntConPetCash) to learn more.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

8.5

551

Discuss Management Responsibilities for Maintaining Internal Controls

within an Organization
Because internal controls do protect the integrity of financial statements, large companies have become highly
regulated in their implementation. In addition to Section 404 of the SOX, which addresses reporting and
testing requirements for internal controls, there are other sections of the act that govern management
responsibility for internal controls. Although the auditor reviews internal controls and advises on the
improvement of controls, ultimate responsibility for the controls is on the management of the company.
Under SOX Section 302, in order to provide additional assurance to the financial markets, the chief executive
officer (CEO), who is the executive within a company with the highest-ranking title and the overall
responsibility for management of the company, and the chief financial officer (CFO), who is the corporation
officer who reports to the CEO and oversees all of the accounting and finance concerns of a company, must
personally certify that (1) they have reviewed the internal control report provided by the auditor; (2) the report
does not contain any inaccurate information; and (3) they believe that all financial information fairly states the
financial conditions, income, and cash flows of the entity. The sign-off under Section 302 makes the CEO and
CFO personally responsible for financial reporting as well as internal control structure.
While the executive sign-offs seem like they would be just a formality, they actually have a great deal of power
in court cases. Prior to SOX, when an executive swore in court that he or she was not aware of the occurrence
of some type of malfeasance, either committed by his or her firm or against his or her firm, the executive
would claim a lack of knowledge of specific circumstances. The typical response was, “I can’t be expected to
know everything.” In fact, in virtually all of the trials involving potential malfeasance, this claim was made and
often was successful in a not-guilty verdict.
The initial response to the new SOX requirements by many people was that there was already sufficient
affirmation by the CEO and CFO and other executives to the accuracy and fairness of the financial statements
and that the SOX requirements were unnecessary. However, it was determined that the SOX requirements
provided a degree of legal responsibility that previously might have been assumed but not actually stated.
Even if a company is not public and not governed by the SOX, it is important to note that the tone is set at the
managerial level, called the tone at the top. If management respects the internal control system and
emphasizes the importance of maintaining proper internal controls, the rest of the staff will follow and create
a cohesive environment. A proper tone at the top demonstrates management’s commitment toward
openness, honesty, integrity, and ethical behavior.

YOUR TURN
Defending the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
You are having a conversation with the CFO of a public company. Imagine that the CFO complains that
there is no benefit to Sections 302 and 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act relative to the cost, as “our
company has always valued internal controls before this regulation and never had an issue.” He believes
that this regulation is an unnecessary overstep. How would you respond and defend the need for
Sections 302 and 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act?
Solution
I would tell the CFO the following:

552

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

1. Everyone says that they have always valued internal controls, even those who did not.
2. Better security for the public is worth the cost.
3. The cost of compliance is more than recovered in the company’s market price for its stock.

THINK IT THROUGH
Personal Internal Controls
Technology plays a very important role in internal controls. One recent significant security breach
through technology was the Equifax breach. What is an internal control that you can personally
implement to protect your personal data as a result of this breach, or any other future breach?

8.6

Define the Purpose of a Bank Reconciliation, and Prepare a Bank

Reconciliation and Its Associated Journal Entries
The bank is a very important partner to all businesses. Not only does the bank provide basic checking services,
but they process credit card transactions, keep cash safe, and may finance loans when needed.
Bank accounts for businesses can involve thousands of transactions per month. Due to the number of ongoing
transactions, an organization’s book balance for its checking account rarely is the same as the balance that the
bank records reflect for the entity at any given point. These timing differences are typically caused by the fact
that there will be some transactions that the organization is aware of before the bank, or transactions the
bank is aware of before the company.
For example, if a company writes a check that has not cleared yet, the company would be aware of the
transaction before the bank is. Similarly, the bank might have received funds on the company’s behalf and
recorded them in the bank’s records for the company before the organization is aware of the deposit.
With the large volume of transactions that impact a bank account, it becomes necessary to have an internal
control system in place to assure that all cash transactions are properly recorded within the bank account, as
well as on the ledger of the business. The bank reconciliation is the internal financial report that explains and
documents any differences that may exist between the balance of a checking account as reflected by the
bank’s records (bank balance) for a company and the company’s accounting records (company balance).
The bank reconciliation is an internal document prepared by the company that owns the checking account.
The transactions with timing differences are used to adjust and reconcile both the bank and company
balances; after the bank reconciliation is prepared accurately, both the bank balance and the company balance
will be the same amount.
Note that the transactions the company is aware of have already been recorded (journalized) in its records.
However, the transactions that the bank is aware of but the company is not must be journalized in the entity’s
records.

Fundamentals of the Bank Reconciliation Procedure
The balance on a bank statement can differ from company’s financial records due to one or more of the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

553

following circumstances:
• An outstanding check: a check that was written and deducted from the financial records of the company
but has not been cashed by the recipient, so the amount has not been removed from the bank account.
• A deposit in transit: a deposit that was made by the business and recorded on its books but has not yet
been recorded by the bank.
• Deductions for a bank service fee: fees often charged by banks each month for management of the bank
account. These may be fixed maintenance fees, per-check fees, or a fee for a check that was written for an
amount greater than the balance in the checking account, called an nonsufficient funds (NSF) check.
These fees are deducted by the bank from the account but would not appear on the financial records.
• Errors initiated by either the client or the bank: for example, the client might record a check incorrectly in
its records, for either a greater or lesser amount than was written. Also, the bank might report a check
either with an incorrect balance or in the wrong client’s checking account.
• Additions such as interest or funds collected by the bank for the client: interest is added to the bank
account as earned but is not reported on the financial records. These additions might also include funds
collected by the bank for the client.

Demonstration of a Bank Reconciliation
A bank reconciliation is structured to include the information shown in Figure 8.6.

Figure 8.6

Bank Reconciliation. A bank reconciliation includes categories for adjustments to both the bank

balance and the book balance. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)
Assume the following circumstances for Feeter Plumbing Company, a small business located in Northern Ohio.
1. After all posting is up to date, at the end of July 31, the book balance shows $32,760, and the bank
statement balance shows $77,040.
2. Check 5523 for $9,620 and 6547 for $10,000 are outstanding.
3. Check 5386 for $2,000 is removed from the bank account correctly but is recorded on the accounting
records for $1,760. This was in payment of dues. The effects of this transaction resulted in an error of $320
that must be deducted from the company’s book balance.
4. The July 31 night deposit of $34,300 was delivered to the bank after hours. As a result, the deposit is not
on the bank statement, but it is on the financial records.
5. Upon review of the bank statement, an error is uncovered. A check is removed from the account from
Feeter for $240 that should have been removed from the account of another customer of the bank.

554

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

6. In the bank statement is a note stating that the bank collected $60,000 in charges (payments) from the
credit card company as well as $1,800 in interest. This transaction is on the bank statement but not in the
company’s financial records.
7. The bank notified Feeter that a $2,200 check was returned unpaid from customer Berson due to
insufficient funds in Berson’s account. This check return is reflected on the bank statement but not in the
records of Feeter.
8. Bank service charges for the month are $80. They have not been recorded on Feeter’s records.
Each item would be recorded on the bank reconciliation as follows:

One important trait of the bank reconciliation is that it identifies transactions that have not been recorded by
the company that are supposed to be recorded. Journal entries are required to adjust the book balance to the
correct balance.
In the case of Feeter, the first entry will record the collection of the note, as well as the interest collected.

The second entry required is to adjust the books for the check that was returned from Berson.

The third entry is to adjust the recording error for check 5386.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

555

The final entry is to record the bank service charges that are deducted by the bank but have not been recorded
on the records.

The previous entries are standard to ensure that the bank records are matching to the financial records. These
entries are necessary to update Feeter‛s general ledger cash account to reflect the adjustments made by the
bank.

LINK TO LEARNING
This practical article illustrates the key points of why a bank reconciliation is important
(https://openstax.org/l/50BankReconcil) for both business and personal reasons.

8.7

Describe Fraud in Financial Statements and Sarbanes-Oxley Act

Requirements
Financial statements are the end result of an accountant’s work and are the responsibility of management.
Proper internal controls help the accountant determine that the financial statements fairly present the
financial position and performance of a company. Financial statement fraud occurs when the financial
statements are used to conceal the actual financial condition of a company or to hide specific transactions that
may be illegal. Financial statement fraud may take on many different methods, but it is generally called
cooking the books. This issue may occur for many purposes.
A common reason to cook the books is to create a false set of a company’s books used to convince investors
or lenders to provide money to the company. Investors and lenders rely on a properly prepared set of financial
statements in making their decision to provide the company with money. Another reason to misstate a set of
financial statements is to hide corporate looting such as excessive retirement perks of top executives, unpaid
loans to top executives, improper stock options, and any other wrongful financial action. Yet another reason to
misreport a company’s financial data is to drive the stock price higher. Internal controls assist the accountant
in locating and identifying when management of a company wants to mislead the inventors or lenders.
The financial accountant or members of management who set out to cook the books are intentionally
attempting to deceive the user of the financial statements. The actions of upper management are being
concealed, and in most cases, the entire financial position of the company is being purposely misreported.
Regardless of the reason for misstating the true condition of a company’s financial position, doing so misleads
any person using the financial statements of a company to evaluate the company and its operations.

556

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

How Companies Cook the Books to Misrepresent Their Financial Condition
One of the most common ways companies cook the books is by manipulating revenue accounts or accounts
receivables. Proper revenue recognition involves accounting for revenue when the company has met its
obligation on a contract. Financial statement fraud involves early revenue recognition, or recognizing revue
that does not exist, and receivable accountings, used in tandem with false revenue reporting. HealthSouth
used a combination of false revenue accounts and misstated accounts receivable in a direct manipulation of
the revenue accounts to commit a multibillion-dollar fraud between 1996 and 2002. Several chief financial
officers and other company officials went to prison as a result.

[9]

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Internal Controls at HealthSouth
The fraud at HealthSouth was possible because some of the internal controls were ignored. The company
failed to maintain standard segregation of duties and allowed management override of internal controls.
The fraud required the collusion of the entire accounting department, concealing hundreds of thousands
of fraudulent transactions through the use of falsified documents and fraudulent accounting schemes
that included revenue recognition irregularities (such as recognizing accounts receivables to be recorded
as revenue before collection), misclassification of expenses and asset acquisitions, and fraudulent
merger and acquisition accounting. The result was billions of dollars of fraud. Simply implementing and
following proper internal control procedures would have stopped this massive fraud.

[10]

Many companies may go to great lengths to perpetuate financial statement fraud. Besides the direct
manipulation of revenue accounts, there are many other ways fraudulent companies manipulate their
financial statements. Companies with large inventory balances can misrepresent their inventory account
balances and use this misrepresentation to overstate the amount of their assets to get larger loans or use the
increased balance to entice investors through claims of exaggerated revenues. The inventory accounts can
also be used to overstate income. Such inventory manipulations can include the following:
• Channel stuffing: encouraging customers to buy products under favorable terms. These terms include
allowing the customer to return or even not pick up goods sold, without a corresponding reserve to
account for the returns.
• Sham sales: sales that have not occurred and for which there are no customers.
• Bill-and-hold sales: recognition of income before the title transfers to the buyer, and holding the
inventory in the seller’s warehouse.
• Improper cutoff: recording sales of inventory in the wrong period and before the inventory is sold; this is
a type of early revenue recognition.
• Round-tripping: selling items with the promise to buy the items back, usually on credit, so there is no
economic benefit.

9 Melinda Dickinson. “Former HealthSouth Boss Found Liable for $2.9 Billion.” Reuters. June 18, 2009. https://www.reuters.com/article/ushealthsouth-scrushy/former-healthsouth-boss-found-liable-for-2-9-billion-idUSTRE55H4IP20090618
10 David McCann. “Two CFOs Tell a Tale of Fraud at HealthSouth.” CFO.com. March 27, 2017. .http://ww2.cfo.com/fraud/2017/03/two-cfostell-tale-fraud-healthsouth/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

557

These are just a few examples of the way an organization might manipulate inventory or sales to create false
revenue.
One of the most famous financial statement frauds involved Enron, as discussed previously. Enron started as
an interstate pipeline company, but then branched out into many different ventures. In addition to the internal
control deficiencies discussed earlier, the financial statement fraud started when the company began to
attempt to hide its losses.
The fraudulent financial reporting schemes included building assets and immediately taking as income any
projected profits on construction and hiding the losses from operating assets in an off-the-balance sheet
transaction called special purpose entities, which are separate, often complicated legal entities that are often
used to absorb risk for a corporation. Enron moved assets that were losing money off of its books and onto
the books of the Special Purpose Entity. This way, Enron could hide its bad business decisions and continue to
report a profit, even though its assets were losing money. Enron’s financial statement fraud created false
revenues with the misstatement of assets and liability balances. This was further supported by inadequate
balance sheet footnotes and the related disclosures. For example, required disclosures were ramped up as a
result of these special purpose entities.

Sarbanes-Oxley Act Compliance Today
The Enron scandal and related financial statement frauds led to investors requiring that public companies
maintain better internal controls and develop stronger governance systems, while auditors perform a better
job at auditing public companies. These requirements, in turn, led to the regulations developed under SOX
that were intended to protect the investing public.
Since SOX was first passed, it has adapted to changing technology and now requires public companies to
protect their accounting and financial data from hackers and other outside or internal forces through stronger
internal controls designed to protect the data. The Journal of Accountancy supported these new requirements
and reported that the results of SOX have been positive for both companies and investors.
As discussed in the Journal of Accountancy article,

[11]

there are three conditions that are increasingly affecting

compliance with SOX requirements:
• PCAOB requirements. The PCAOB has increased the requirements for inspection reports, with a greater
emphasis on deficiency evaluation.
• Revenue recognition. The Financial Accounting Standards Board has introduced a new standard for
revenue recognition. This requirement has led to the need for companies to update control
documentation.
• Cybersecurity. Cybersecurity is the practice of protecting software, hardware, and data from digital
attacks. As would be expected in today’s environment, the number of recent cybersecurity disclosures has
significantly grown.
Under current guidelines, instead of the SOX requiring compliance with just the financial component of
reporting and internal control, the guidelines now allow application to information technology (IT) activities as
well. A major change under the SOX guidelines involves the method of storage of a company’s electronic
records. While the act did not specifically require a particular storage method, it did provide guidance on which
records were to be stored and for how long they should be stored.

11 Ken Tysiac. “Companies Spending More Time on SOX Compliance.” Journal of Accountancy. June 12, 2017.
https://www.journalofaccountancy.com/news/2017/jun/companies-spending-more-time-on-sox-compliance-201716857.html

558

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

The SOX now requires that all business records, electronic records, and electronic messages must be stored
for at least five years. The penalties for noncompliance include either imprisonment or fines, or a combination
of the two options.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

559

Key Terms
bank reconciliation internal financial report that explains and documents any differences that may exist
between a balance within a checking account and the company’s records
bank service fee fee often charged by a bank each month for management of the bank account
chief executive officer (CEO) executive within a company with the highest ranking title who has the overall
responsibility for the management of a company; reports to the board of directors
chief financial officer (CFO) corporation officer who reports to the CEO and oversees all of the accounting
and finance concerns of a company
collusion private cooperation or agreement, between more than one person, primarily for a deceitful, illegal,
or immoral cause or purpose
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) independent, private-sector group whose five sponsoring
organizations periodically identify and address specific accounting issues or projects related to internal
controls
control lapse when there is a deviation from standard control protocol that leads to a failure in the internal
control and/or fraud prevention processes or systems
cooking the books (also, financial statement fraud) financial statements are used to conceal the actual
financial condition of a company or to hide specific transactions that may be illegal
cybersecurity practice of protecting software, hardware, and data from digital attacks
deposit in transit deposit that was made by the business and recorded on its books but has not yet been
recorded by the bank
external auditor generally works for an outside CPA firm or his or her own private practice and conducts
audits and other assignments, such as reviews
financial statement fraud using financial statements to conceal the actual financial condition of a company
or to hide specific transactions that may be illegal
fraud act of intentionally deceiving a person or organization or misrepresenting a relationship in order to
secure some type of benefit, either financial or nonfinancial
fraud triangle concept explaining the reasoning behind a person’s decision to commit fraud; the three
elements are perceived opportunity, rationalization, and incentive
imprest account account that is only debited when the account is established or the total ending balance is
increased
internal auditor employee of an organization whose job is to provide an independent and objective
evaluation of the company’s accounting and operational activities
internal control system sum of all internal controls and policies within an organization that protect assets
and data
internal controls systems used by an organization to manage risk and diminish the occurrence of fraud,
consisting of the control environment, the accounting system, and control activities
nonsufficient funds (NSF) check check written for an amount that is greater than the balance in the
checking account
outstanding check check that was written and deducted from the financial records of the company but has
not been cashed by the recipient, so the amount has not been removed from the bank account
petty cash fund amount of cash held on hand to be used to make payments for small day-to-day purchases
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) organization created under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
to regulate conflict, control disclosures, and set sanction guidelines for any violation of regulation
publicly traded company company whose stock is traded (bought and sold) on an organized stock

560

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

exchange
revenue recognition accounting for revenue when the company has met its obligation on a contract
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) federal law that regulates business practices; intended to protect investors by
enhancing the accuracy and reliability of corporate financial statements and disclosures through
governance guidelines including sanctions for criminal conduct
special purpose entities separate, often complicated legal entities that are often used to absorb risk for a
corporation

Summary
8.1 Analyze Fraud in the Accounting Workplace
• The fraud triangle helps explain the mechanics of fraud by examining the common contributing factors of
perceived opportunity, incentive, and rationalization.
• Due to the nature of their functions, internal and external auditors, through the implementation of
effective internal controls, are in excellent positions to prevent opportunity-based fraud.
8.2 Define and Explain Internal Controls and Their Purpose within an Organization
• A system of internal control is the policies combined with procedures created by management to protect
the integrity of assets and ensure efficiency of operations.
• The system prevents losses and helps management maintain an effective means of performance.
8.3 Describe Internal Controls within an Organization
• Principles of an effective internal control system include having clear responsibilities, documenting
operations, having adequate insurance, separating duties, and setting clear responsibilities for action.
• Internal controls are applicable to all types of organizations: for profit, not-for-profit, and governmental
organizations.
8.4 Define the Purpose and Use of a Petty Cash Fund, and Prepare Petty Cash Journal Entries
• The purpose of a petty cash fund is to make payments for small amounts that are immaterial, such as
postage, minor repairs, or day-to-day supplies.
• A petty cash account is an imprest account, so it is only debited when the fund is initially established or
increased in amount. Transactions to replenish the account involve a debit to the expenses and a credit to
the cash account (e.g., bank account).
8.5 Discuss Management Responsibilities for Maintaining Internal Controls within an Organization
• It is the responsibility of management to assure that internal controls of a company are effective and in
place.
• Though management has always had responsibility over internal controls, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act has
added additional assurances that management takes this responsibility seriously, and placed sanctions
against corporate officers and boards of directors who do not take appropriate responsibility.
• Sarbanes-Oxley only applies to public companies. Even though the rules of this act only apply to public
companies, proper internal controls are an important aspect of all businesses of any size. Tone at the top
is a key component of a proper internal control system.
8.6 Define the Purpose of a Bank Reconciliation, and Prepare a Bank Reconciliation and Its Associated
Journal Entries
• The bank reconciliation is an internal document that verifies the accuracy of records maintained by the
depositor and the financial institution. The balance on the bank statement is adjusted for outstanding

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

561

checks and uncleared deposits. The record balance is adjusted for service charges and interest earned.
• The bank reconciliation is an internal control document that ensures transactions to the bank account are
properly recorded, and allows for verification of transactions.
8.7 Describe Fraud in Financial Statements and Sarbanes-Oxley Act Requirements
• Financial statement fraud has occurred when financial statements intentionally hide illegal transactions or
fail to accurately reflect the true financial condition of an entity.
• Cooking the books can be used to create false records to present to lenders or investors. It also is used to
hide corporate looting of funds and other resources, or to increase stock prices. Cooking the books is an
intentional action and is often achieved through the manipulation of the entity’s revenues or accounts
receivable.
• Health South and Enron were used as examples of past corporate financial fraud.
• The section takes a brief look at the current state of SOX compliance.

Multiple Choice
1.

8.1 Which of the following would a fraudster perceive as a pressure?
A.

lack of management oversight

B.

everyone does it

C.

living beyond one’s means

D.

lack of an internal audit function

2.

8.2 Internal control is said to be the backbone of all businesses. Which of the following is the best

description of internal controls?
A.

Internal controls ensure that the financial statements published are correct.

B.

The only role of internal controls is to protect customer data.

C.

Internal controls and company policies are important to protect and safeguard assets and to protect all
company data and are designed to protect the company from fraud.

D.
3.

Internal controls are designed to keep employees from committing fraud against the company.
8.3 What is the best way for owners of small businesses to maintain proper internal controls?

A.

The owner must have enough knowledge of all aspects of the company and have controls in place to
track all assets.

B.

Small businesses do not need to worry about internal controls.

C.

Small businesses should make one of their employees in charge of all aspects of the company, giving
the owner the ability to run the company and generate sales.

D.
4.

Only managers need to be concerned about internal controls.
8.3 Which of the following is not considered to be part of the internal control structure of a company?

A.

Ensure that assets are kept secure.

B.

Monitor operations of the organization to ensure maximum efficiency.

C.

Publish accurate financial statements on a regular basis.

D.

Ensure assets are properly used.

562

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

5.

8.3 There are several elements to internal controls. Which of the following would not address the issue of

having cash transactions reported in the accounting records?
A.

One employee would have access to the cash register.

B.

The cash drawer should be closed out, and cash and the sales register should be reconciled on a
prenumbered form.

C.

Ask customers to report to a manager if they do not receive a sales receipt or invoice.

D.

The person behind the cash register should also be responsible for making price adjustments.

6.

8.3 A company is trying to set up proper internal controls for their accounts payable/inventory

purchasing system. Currently the purchase order is generated by the same person who receives the inventory.
Together the purchase order and the receiving ticket are sent to accounts payable for payment. What changes
would you make to improve the internal control structure?
A.

No changes would be made since the person paying the bills is different from the person ordering the
inventory.

B.

The person in accounts payable should generate the purchase order.

C.

The person in accounts payable should generate the receiving ticket once the invoice from the supplier
is received.

D.

The responsibilities of generating the purchase order and receiving the inventory should be separated
among two different people.

7.

8.3 There are three employees in the accounting department: payroll clerk, accounts payable clerk, and

accounts receivable clerk. Which one of these employees should not make the daily deposit?
A.

payroll clerk

B.

account payable clerk

C.

accounts receivable clerk

D.

none of them

8.

8.3 Which one of the following documents is not needed to process a payment to a vendor?
A.

vendor invoice

B.

packing slip

C.

check request

D.

purchase order

9.

8.3 What is the advantage of using technology in the internal control system?
A.

Passwords can be used to allow access by employees.

B.

Any cash received does not need to be reconciled because the computer tracks all transactions.

C.

Transactions are easily changed.

D.

Employees cannot steal because all cash transactions are recorded by the computer/cash register.

10.

8.3 Which of the following assets require the strongest of internal controls?
A.

inventory

B.

credit cards

C.

computer equipment

D.

cash

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

11.

563

8.4 Which of the following is true about the Sarbanes-Oxley Act?
A.

It was passed to ensure that internal controls are properly documented and tested by public
companies.

B.

It applies to both public and smaller companies.

C.

It requires all companies to report their internal control policies to the US Securities and Exchange
Commission.

D.
12.

It does not require additional costs or resources to have adequate controls.
8.4 The external auditor of a company has certain requirements due to Sarbanes-Oxley. Which of the

following best describes these requirements?
A.

The auditor is required to only report weaknesses in the internal control design of the company he or
she is auditing.

B.

The auditor must issue an internal control report on the evaluation of internal controls overseen by the
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board

C.

The auditor in charge can serve for a period of only two years.

D.

The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board reviews reports submitted by the auditors when no
evaluations have been performed.

13.

8.4 Petty cash is used to ________.
A.

avoid having to use checks frequently

B.

make small payments

C.

avoid having to retain receipts because the amounts are very small

D.

avoid having to get approvals due to the small amount of cash being paid

14.

8.4 A company has decided to start a petty cash fund for $150. Which of the following is the correct

journal entry?
A.

B.

C.

No entry is required.

D.

15.

8.6 Which of the following items are found on a book side of the bank reconciliation?
A.

beginning bank balance

B.

outstanding checks

C.

interest income

D.

error made by bank

564

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

16.

8.6 Which of the following are found on the bank side of the bank reconciliation?
A.

NSF check

B.

interest income

C.

wire transfer into client’s account

D.

deposit in transit

17.

8.7 What would be a reason a company would want to understate income?
A.

to help nudge its stock price higher

B.

to lower its tax bill

C.

to show an increase in overall profits

D.

to increase investor confidence

18.

8.7 What would be a reason a company would want to overstate income?
A.

to help nudge its stock price higher

B.

to lower its tax bill

C.

to show a decrease in overall profits

D.

none of the above

19.

8.7 At what point does revenue recognition occur?
A.

When the purchase order is received

B.

When the seller receives the money for the job

C.

When the seller has met “performance”

D.

When the purchaser makes payment

Questions
1.

8.1 What is an example of perceived opportunity as one of the three elements causing a person to commit

fraud?
2.

8.1 What is an example of rationalization as one of the three elements causing a person to commit

fraud?
3.

8.1 What is an example of incentive as one of the three elements causing a person to commit fraud?

4.

8.2 Why is it important to have a very sound and well-developed internal control structure?

5.

8.2 The information technology departments of all companies have significant and important roles in the

internal control systems. Discuss them and their importance.
6.

8.2 What are the functions of the internal control?

7.

8.3 Discuss the importance of a company having proper insurance and bonding its employees.

8.

8.4 What is the role of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board?

9.

8.4 Why is it important to have a petty cash fund available in a company?

10.

8.3

8.4 Is it required to have only one petty cashier or should the company appoint more than one

person to administer the fund? Why?
11.

8.5 Technology can be used to support a strong internal control system. Discuss how technology has

improved the point-of-sale transactions.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

565

12.

8.6 What is the purpose of the bank reconciliation?

13.

8.6 What should be done if differences are found between the bank statement and the book account?

Exercise Set A
EA1.

8.4 Record the following transactions:

A.

Started a petty cash fund in the amount of $300.

B.

Replenished petty cash fund using the following expenses: Auto $18, Office Expenses $35, Postage
Expense $56, Miscellaneous Expenses $67. Cash on hand is $124.

C.
EA2.

Increased petty cash by $50.
8.4 Record the following transactions:

A.

Started a petty cash fund in the amount of $200.

B.

Replenished petty cash fund using the following expenses: Auto $15, Office Expenses $20, Postage
Expense $81, Miscellaneous Expenses $66. Cash on hand is $10.

C.
EA3.

Increased petty cash by $75.
8.4 Record the following transactions:

A.

Started a petty cash fund in the amount of $300.

B.

Replenished petty cash fund using the following expenses: Auto $69, Office Expenses $77, Postage
Expense $56, Miscellaneous Expenses $98. Cash on hand is $6.

C.
EA4.

Increased petty cash by $60.
8.4 Record the following transactions:

A.

Started a petty cash fund in the amount of $500.

B.

Replenished petty cash fund using the following expenses: Auto $24, Office Expenses $43, Postage
Expense $19, Miscellaneous Expenses $25. Cash on hand is $389.

C.
EA5.

The company has decided to reduce the petty cash fund to $300.
8.6 The bank reconciliation shows the following adjustments:

• Deposits in transit: $1,234
• Outstanding checks: $558
• Bank service charges: $50
• NSF checks: $250
Prepare the correcting journal entry.
EA6.

8.6 The bank reconciliation shows the following adjustments:
• Deposits in transit: $852
• Notes receivable collected by bank: $1,000; interest: $20
• Outstanding checks: $569
• Error by bank: $300
• Bank charges: $30

Prepare the correcting journal entry.

566

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

EA7.

8.6 Using the following information, prepare a bank reconciliation.
• Bank balance: $3,678
• Book balance: $2,547
• Deposits in transit: $321
• Outstanding checks: $108 and $334
• Bank charges: $25
• Notes receivable: $1,000; interest: $35

EA8.

8.6 Prepare the journal entry to reconcile the bank statement in EA7.

EA9.

8.6 Using the following information, prepare a bank reconciliation.
• Bank balance: $4,587
• Book balance: $5,577
• Deposits in transit: $1,546
• Outstanding checks: $956
• Interest income: $56
• NSF check: $456

EA10.

8.6 Prepare the journal entry to reconcile the bank statement in EA9.

EA11.

8.6 Using the following information, prepare a bank reconciliation.

• Bank balance: $6,988
• Book balance: $6,626
• Deposits in transit: $1,600
• Outstanding checks: $599 and $1,423
• Bank charges: $75
• Bank incorrectly charged the account $75. The bank will correct the error next month.
• Check number 2456 correctly cleared the bank in the amount of $234 but posted in the accounting
records as $324. This check was expensed to Utilities Expense.
EA12.

8.6 Prepare the journal entry to reconcile the bank statement in EA11.

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

8.4 Record the following transactions:

A.

Started a petty cash fund in the amount of $575

B.

Replenished petty cash fund using the following expenses: Auto $18, Office Expenses $35, Postage
Expense $56, Miscellaneous Expenses $67. Cash on hand is $399.

C.
EB2.

Increased petty cash by $25.
8.4 Record the following transactions:

A.

Started a petty cash fund in the amount of $260.

B.

Replenished petty cash fund using the following expenses: Auto $15, Office Expenses $20, Postage
Expense $81, Miscellaneous Expenses $104. Cash on hand is $37.

C.

Increased petty cash by $80.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

EB3.

8.4 Record the following transactions:

A.

Started a petty cash fund in the amount of $340.

B.

Replenished petty cash fund using the following expenses: Auto $69, Office Expenses $77, Postage
Expense $56, Miscellaneous Expenses $98. Cash on hand is $45.

C.
EB4.

Increased petty cash by $65.
8.4 Record the following transactions:

A.

Started a petty cash fund in the amount of $1,000.

B.

Replenished petty cash fund using the following expenses: Auto $61, Office Expenses $23, Postage
Expense $57, Miscellaneous Expenses $30.

C.
EB5.

The company has decided to reduce the petty cash fund to $600.
8.6 The bank reconciliation shows the following adjustments.

• Deposits in transit: $526
• Outstanding checks: $328
• Bank charges: $55
• NSF checks: $69
Prepare the correcting journal entry.
EB6.

8.6 The bank reconciliation shows the following adjustments.
• Deposits in transit: $1,698
• Notes receivable collected by bank: $2,500; interest: $145
• Outstanding checks: $987
• Error by bank: $436
• Bank charges: $70

Prepare the correcting journal entry.
EB7.

8.6 Using the following information, prepare a bank reconciliation.
• Bank balance: $4,021
• Book balance: $2,928
• Deposits in transit: $1,111
• Outstanding checks: $679
• Bank charges: $35
• Notes receivable: $1,325; interest: $235

EB8.

8.6 Prepare the journal entry to reconcile the bank statement in EB7.

EB9.

8.6 Using the following information, prepare a bank reconciliation.
• Bank balance: $7,651
• Book balance: $10,595
• Deposits in transit: $2,588
• Outstanding checks: $489
• Interest income: $121
• NSF check: $966

EB10.

8.6 Prepare the journal entry to reconcile the bank statement in EB9.

567

568

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

EB11.

8.6 Using the following information, prepare a bank reconciliation.

• Bank balance: $12,565.
• Book balance: $13,744.
• Deposits in transit: $2,509.
• Outstanding checks: $1,777.
• Bank charges: $125.
• Bank incorrectly charged the account for $412. The bank will correct the error next month.
• Check number 1879 correctly cleared the bank in the amount of $562 but posted in the accounting
records as $652. This check was expensed to Utilities Expense.
EB12.

8.6 Prepare the journal entry to reconcile the bank statement in EB11.

Problem Set A
PA1.

8.4 On September 1, French company has decided to initiate a petty cash fund in the amount of $800.

Prepare journal entries for the following transactions:
A.

On September 5, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, and the following are the receipts: Auto
Expense $37, Supplies $124, Postage Expense $270, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $168,
Miscellaneous Expense $149. The cash on hand at this time was $48.

B.

On September 14, the petty cash fund needed replenishment and the following are the receipts: Auto
Expense $18, Supplies $175, Postage Expense $50, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $269,
Miscellaneous Expense $59. The cash on hand at this time was $210.

C.

On September 23, the petty cash fund needed replenishment and the following are the receipts: Auto
Expense $251, Supplies $88, Postage Expense $63, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $182,
Miscellaneous Expense $203. The cash on hand at this time was $20.

D.

On September 29, the company determined that the petty cash fund needed to be increased to $1,000.

E.

On September 30, the petty cash fund needed replenishment as it was month end. The following are
the receipts: Auto Expense $18, Supplies $15, Postage Expense $57, Repairs and Maintenance Expense
$49, Miscellaneous Expense $29. The cash on hand at this time was $837.

PA2.

8.4 On May 2 Kellie Company has decided to initiate a petty cash fund in the amount of $1,200.

Prepare journal entries for the following transactions:
A.

On July 5, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, and the following are the receipts: Auto Expense
$125, Supplies $368, Postage Expense $325, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $99, Miscellaneous
Expense $259. The cash on hand at this time was $38.

B.

On June 14, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, and the following are the receipts: Auto
Expense $425, Supplies $95, Postage Expense $240, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $299,
Miscellaneous Expense $77. The cash on hand at this time was $80.

C.

On June 23, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, and the following are the receipts: Auto
Expense $251, Supplies $188, Postage Expense $263, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $182,
Miscellaneous Expense $203. The cash on hand at this time was $93.

D.

On June 29, the company determined that the petty cash fund needed to be decreased to $1,000.

E.

On June 30, the petty cash fund needed replenishment as it was month-end. The following are the
receipts: Auto Expense $114, Supplies $75, Postage Expense $50, Repairs and Maintenance Expense
$121, Miscellaneous Expense $39. The cash on hand at this time was $603.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

PA3.

569

8.4 Domingo Company started its business on January 1, 2019. The following transactions occurred

during the month of May. Prepare the journal entries in the journal on Page 1.
A.

The owners invested $10,000 from their personal account to the business account.

B.

Paid rent $500 with check #101.

C.

Initiated a petty cash fund $500 with check #102.

D.

Received $1,000 cash for services rendered.

E.

Purchased office supplies for $158 with check #103.

F.

Purchased computer equipment $2,500, paid $1,350 with check #104, and will pay the remainder in 30
days.

G.

Received $800 cash for services rendered.

H. Paid wages $600, check #105.
I.

Petty cash reimbursement: office supplies $256, maintenance expense $108, postage expense $77,
miscellaneous expense $55. Cash on hand $11. Check #106.

J.

Increased petty cash by $30, check #107.

PA4.

8.4 Prepare a trial balance using the journal entries in PA3.

PA5.

8.4 Inner Resources Company started its business on April 1, 2019. The following transactions

occurred during the month of April. Prepare the journal entries in the journal on Page 1.
A.

The owners invested $8,500 from their personal account to the business account.

B.

Paid rent $650 with check #101.

C.

Initiated a petty cash fund $550 check #102.

D.

Received $750 cash for services rendered.

E.

Purchased office supplies for $180 with check #103.

F.

Purchased computer equipment $8,500, paid $1,600 with check #104 and will pay the remainder in 30
days.

G.

Received $1,200 cash for services rendered.

H. Paid wages $560, check #105.
I.

Petty cash reimbursement office supplies $200, Maintenance Expense $140, Miscellaneous Expense
$65. Cash on Hand $93. Check #106.

J.
PA6.

Increased Petty Cash by $100, check #107.
8.4 Prepare a trial balance using the journal entries in PA5.

570

PA7.

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

8.6 Identify where each of the following transactions would be found on the bank reconciliation.

Transaction

Increase to Bank

Decrease to

Increase to Book

Decrease to

Side

Bank Side

Side

Book Side

Outstanding check
Interest income
NFS check
Wire transfer by
customer
Deposit in transit
Bank charges
Table 8.1
PA8.

8.6 Which of the following transactions will require a journal entry? Indicate if it will be a debit or a

credit and to what account the entry will be recorded.

Transaction

No Journal Entry Needed

Outstanding check
Interest income
NFS check
Wire transfer by customer
Deposit in transit
Bank charges
Table 8.2

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Journal Entry Needed

Debit

Credit

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

PA9.

8.6 Domingo Company received the following bank statement. Using PA9, prepare the bank

reconciliation.

PA10.

8.6 Prepare the journal entry required to reconcile the book balance to the bank balance.

PA11.

8.6 Inner Resources Company received the following bank statement. Using the information from

PA11 and PA12, prepare the bank reconciliation.

PA12.

8.6 Prepare the journal entry required to reconcile the book balance to the bank balance.

571

572

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

Problem Set B

B

PB1.

8.4 On June 1 French company has decided to initiate a petty cash fund in the amount of $800.

Prepare journal entries for the following transactions:
A.

On June 5, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, and the following are the receipts: Auto Expense
$37, Supplies $124, Postage Expense $270, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $168, Miscellaneous
Expense $149. The cash on hand at this time was $48.

B.

On June 14, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, and the following are the receipts: Auto
Expense $18, Supplies $175, Postage Expense $50, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $269,
Miscellaneous Expense $59. The cash on hand at this time was $220.

C.

On June 23, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, and the following are the receipts: Auto
Expense $251, Supplies $88, Postage Expense $63, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $182,
Miscellaneous Expense $203. The cash on hand at this time was $20.

D.

On June 29, the company determined that the petty cash fund needed to be increased to $1,000.

E.

On June 30, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, as it was month end. The following are the
receipts: Auto Expense $18, Supplies $175, Postage Expense $50, Repairs and Maintenance Expense
$269, Miscellaneous Expense $59. The cash on hand at this time was $437.

PB2.

8.4 On July 2 Kellie Company has decided to initiate a petty cash fund in the amount of $1,200. Prepare

journal entries for the following transactions:
A.

On July 5, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, and the following are the receipts: Auto Expense
$125, Supplies $368, Postage Expense $325, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $99, Miscellaneous
Expense $259. The cash on hand at this time was $38.

B.

On June 14, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, and the following are the receipts: Auto
Expense $425, Supplies $95, Postage Expense $240, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $299,
Miscellaneous Expense $77. The cash on hand at this time was $110.

C.

On June 23, the petty cash fund needed replenishment and the following are the receipts: Auto
Expense $251, Supplies $188, Postage Expense $263, Repairs and Maintenance Expense $182,
Miscellaneous Expense $203. The cash on hand at this time was $93.

D.

On June 29, the company determined that the petty cash fund needed to be decreased to $1,000.

E.

On June 30, the petty cash fund needed replenishment, as it was month end. The following are the
receipts: Auto Expense $14, Supplies $75, Postage Expense $150, Repairs and Maintenance Expense
$121, Miscellaneous Expense $39. The cash on hand at this time was $603.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

PB3.

573

8.4 Hajun Company started its business on May 1, 2019. The following transactions occurred during

the month of May. Prepare the journal entries in the journal on Page 1.
A.

The owners invested $5,000 from their personal account to the business account.

B.

Paid rent $400 with check #101.

C.

Initiated a petty cash fund $200 check #102.

D.

Received $400 cash for services rendered

E.

Purchased office supplies for $90 with check #103.

F.

Purchased computer equipment $1,000 , paid $350 with check #104 and will pay the remainder in 30
days.

G.

Received $500 cash for services rendered.

H. Paid wages $250, check #105.
I.

Petty cash reimbursement office supplies $25, Maintenance Expense $125, Miscellaneous Expense $35.
Cash on hand $18. Check #106.

J.

Increased Petty Cash by $50, check #107.

PB4.

8.4 Prepare a trial balance using the journal entries in PB3.

PB5.

8.4 Lavender Company started its business on April 1, 2019. The following are the transactions that

happened during the month of April. Prepare the journal entries in the journal on Page 1.
A.

The owners invested $7,500 from their personal account to the business account.

B.

Paid rent $600 with check #101.

C.

Initiated a petty cash fund $250 check #102.

D.

Received $350 cash for services rendered.

E.

Purchased office supplies for $125 with check #103.

F.

Purchased computer equipment $1,500, paid $500 with check #104, and will pay the remainder in 30
days.

G.

Received $750 cash for services rendered.

H. Paid wages $375, check #105.
I.

Petty cash reimbursement Office Supplies $50, Maintenance Expense $80, Miscellaneous Expense $60.
Cash on hand $8. Check #106.

J.
PB6.

Increased Petty Cash by $70, check #107.
8.4 Prepare a trial balance for Lavender Company using the journal entries in PB5.

574

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

PB7.

8.6 Identify where each of the following transactions would be found on the bank reconciliation.

Transaction

Increase to

Decrease to

Increase to

Decrease to

Bank Side

Bank Side

Book Side

Book Side

Overcharge by Bank
(Error)
Interest Income
Automatic Loan
Payment
Wire Transfer by
Customer
Deposit in Transit
Outstanding Check
Table 8.3
PB8.

8.6 Which of the following transactions will require a journal entry? Indicate if it will be a debit or a

credit, and to which account the entry will be recorded.

Transaction

No Journal Entry

Overcharge by Bank (Error)
Interest Income
Automatic Loan Payment
Wire Transfer by Customer
Deposit in Transit
Outstanding Check
Table 8.4

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Journal Entry Needed

Debit

Credit

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

PB9.

575

8.6 Hajun Company received the following bank statement. Using the information from PB9 and PB10,

prepare the bank reconciliation.

PB10.

8.6 Prepare the journal entry required to reconcile the book balance to the bank balance.

PB11.

8.6 Leann Company received the following bank statement. Using the information from PB11 and

PB12, prepare the bank reconciliation.

PB12.

8.6 Prepare the journal entry required to reconcile the book balance to the bank balance.

Thought Provokers
TP1.

8.2 A retail store normally has three people working in the evening. All of the employees have access

to the same cash register. For the last month, the cash count at the end of the evening has been recording
losses. The losses range from $5 to $300. So the manager has decided to be the only one to count the cash at
the end of the evening to keep the losses from happening. Discuss if the change made by the manager is a
good one. Will the losses keep happening, or will this change prevent losses due to theft? What other
recommendations and changes should be considered by this manager?
TP2.

8.2

8.3 Visit a favorite eatery. Describe some of the internal controls that are implemented in the

workplace. Discuss the good and effective internal controls and also discuss areas that need to be addressed
where the eatery is vulnerable to losses.

576

TP3.

Chapter 8 Fraud, Internal Controls, and Cash

8.3 A manufacturing plant was finding a huge increase in the scrapping of raw materials. Its internal

controls were reviewed, and the plant appeared to be strong; segregation of duties was in place. As the
accountant was reconciling some inventory accounts, she found more than a normal amount of scrap tickets.
The tickets were for scrapping the same inventory part, signed by the same person, and the scrap was sold to
only one company. The inventory item was still being ordered, and only one supplier was used to purchase the
parts. After further investigation by the accountant, the company buying the inventory and the company
selling the inventory to the company had different names but shared the same address. Comment on what
went wrong. What happened to the internal controls the company had in place?
TP4.

8.3 The vice president of finance asks the accounts payable (AP) clerk to write a check in the name of

the president for $10,000. He and the president will sign the check (two signatures needed on a check of this
size). He further instructs the AP clerk not to disclose this check to her immediate supervisor. What should the
AP clerk do? Should she prepare the check? Should she inform her immediate supervisor? Discuss with
internal controls in mind.
TP5.

8.3 Even though technology has improved the internal control structure of a company, a supervisor

cannot depend totally on technology. Discuss other internal controls a supervisor needs to implement to
ensure a strong structure.
TP6.

8.6 A bank reconciliation takes time and must balance. An employee was struggling in balancing the

bank reconciliation. Her supervisor told her to “plug” (make an unsupported entry for) the difference, record
to Miscellaneous Expense, and simply move on. Discuss the internal controls problem with this directive.
TP7.

8.6 The bank reconciliation revealed that one deposit had cleared the bank two weeks after the date of

the deposit. Should this be of concern? Why, or why not?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

9

Accounting for Receivables
Figure 9.1 Skateboards Unlimited. Business success is realized with effective receivable management. (credit:
modification of “2013 Street Arts Festival” by Eli Christman/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline
9.1 Explain the Revenue Recognition Principle and How It Relates to Current and Future Sales and
Purchase Transactions
9.2 Account for Uncollectible Accounts Using the Balance Sheet and Income Statement Approaches
9.3 Determine the Efficiency of Receivables Management Using Financial Ratios
9.4 Discuss the Role of Accounting for Receivables in Earnings Management
9.5 Apply Revenue Recognition Principles to Long-Term Projects
9.6 Explain How Notes Receivable and Accounts Receivable Differ
9.7 Appendix: Comprehensive Example of Bad Debt Estimation

Why It Matters
Marie owns Skateboards Unlimited, a skateboard lifestyle shop offering a variety of skate-specific clothing,
equipment, and accessories. Marie prides herself on her ability to accommodate customer needs. One way she
accomplishes this goal is by extending to the customer a line of credit, which would create an account
receivable for Skateboards Unlimited. Even though she has yet to collect cash from her credit customers, she
recognizes the revenue as earned when the sale occurs. This is important, as it allows her to match her sales
correctly with sales-associated expenses in the proper period, based on the matching principle and revenue
recognition guidelines.
By offering credit terms, Skateboards Unlimited operates in good faith that customers will pay their accounts
in full. Sometimes this does not occur, and the bad debt from the receivable has to be written off. Marie

578

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

typically estimates this write-off amount, to show potential investors and lenders a consistent financial
position. When writing off bad debt, Marie is guided by specific accounting principles that dictate the
estimation and bad debt processes. Skateboards Unlimited will need to carefully manage its receivables and
bad debt to reach budget projections and grow the business. This chapter explains and demonstrates
demonstrate the two major methods of estimating and recording bad debt expenses that Skateboards
Unlimited can apply under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
9.1

Explain the Revenue Recognition Principle and How It Relates to Current

and Future Sales and Purchase Transactions
You own a small clothing store and offer your customers cash, credit card, or in-house credit payment options.
Many of your customers choose to pay with a credit card or charge the purchase to their in-house credit
accounts. This means that your store is owed money in the future from either the customer or the credit card
company, depending on payment method. Regardless of credit payment method, your company must decide
when to recognize revenue. Do you recognize revenue when the sale occurs or when cash payment is
received? When do you recognize the expenses associated with the sale? How are these transactions
recognized?

Accounting Principles and Assumptions Regulating Revenue Recognition
Revenue and expense recognition timing is critical to transparent financial presentation. GAAP governs
recognition for publicly traded companies. Even though GAAP is required only for public companies, to display
their financial position most accurately, private companies should manage their financial accounting using its
rules. Two principles governed by GAAP are the revenue recognition principle and the matching principle. Both
the revenue recognition principle and the matching principle give specific direction on revenue and expense
reporting.
The revenue recognition principle, which states that companies must recognize revenue in the period in
which it is earned, instructs companies to recognize revenue when a four-step process is completed. This may
not necessarily be when cash is collected. Revenue can be recognized when all of the following criteria have
been met:
• There is credible evidence that an arrangement exists.
• Goods have been delivered or services have been performed.
• The selling price or fee to the buyer is fixed or can be reasonably determined.
• There is reasonable assurance that the amount owed to the seller is collectible.
The accrual accounting method aligns with this principle, and it records transactions related to revenue
earnings as they occur, not when cash is collected. The revenue recognition principle may be updated
periodically to reflect more current rules for reporting.
For example, a landscaping company signs a $600 contract with a customer to provide landscaping services for
the next six months (assume the landscaping workload is distributed evenly throughout the six months). The
customer sets up an in-house credit line with the company, to be paid in full at the end of the six months. The
landscaping company records revenue earnings each month and provides service as planned. To align with
the revenue recognition principle, the landscaping company will record one month of revenue ($100) each
month as earned; they provided service for that month, even though the customer has not yet paid cash for
the service.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

579

Let’s say that the landscaping company also sells gardening equipment. It sells a package of gardening
equipment to a customer who pays on credit. The landscaping company will recognize revenue immediately,
given that they provided the customer with the gardening equipment (product), even though the customer
has not yet paid cash for the product.
Accrual accounting also incorporates the matching principle (otherwise known as the expense recognition
principle), which instructs companies to record expenses related to revenue generation in the period in which
they are incurred. The principle also requires that any expense not directly related to revenues be reported in
an appropriate manner. For example, assume that a company paid $6,000 in annual real estate taxes. The
principle has determined that costs cannot effectively be allocated based on an individual month’s sales;
instead, it treats the expense as a period cost. In this case, it is going to record 1/12 of the annual expense as a
monthly period cost. Overall, the “matching” of expenses to revenues projects a more accurate representation
of company financials. When this matching is not possible, then the expenses will be treated as period costs.
For example, when the landscaping company sells the gardening equipment, there are costs associated with
that sale, such as the costs of materials purchased or shipping charges. The cost is reported in the same
period as revenue associated with the sale. There cannot be a mismatch in reporting expenses and revenues;
otherwise, financial statements are presented unfairly to stakeholders. Misreporting has a significant impact
on company stakeholders. If the company delayed reporting revenues until a future period, net income would
be understated in the current period. If expenses were delayed until a future period, net income would be
overstated.
Let’s turn to the basic elements of accounts receivable, as well as the corresponding transaction journal
entries.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Ethics in Revenue Recognition
Because each industry typically has a different method for recognizing income, revenue recognition is
one of the most difficult tasks for accountants, as it involves a number of ethical dilemmas related to
income reporting. To provide an industry-wide approach, Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09 and
other related updates were implemented to clarify revenue recognition rules. The American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) announced that these updates would replace U.S. GAAP’s current
industry-specific revenue recognition practices with a principle-based approach, potentially affecting
both day-to-day business accounting and the execution of business contracts with customers.

[1]

The

AICPA and the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) require professional accountants to act
with due care and to remain abreast of new accounting rules and methods of accounting for different
transactions, including revenue recognition.
The IFAC emphasizes the role of professional accountants working within a business in ensuring the
quality of financial reporting: “Management is responsible for the financial information produced by the
company. As such, professional accountants in businesses therefore have the task of defending the
quality of financial reporting right at the source where the numbers and figures are produced!”

[2]

In

accordance with proper revenue recognition, accountants do not recognize revenue before it is earned.

580

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Gift Card Revenue Recognition
Gift cards have become an essential part of revenue generation and growth for many businesses.
Although they are practical for consumers and low cost to businesses, navigating revenue recognition
guidelines can be difficult. Gift cards with expiration dates require that revenue recognition be delayed
until customer use or expiration. However, most gift cards now have no expiration date. So, when do you
recognize revenue?
Companies may need to provide an estimation of projected gift card revenue and usage during a period
based on past experience or industry standards. There are a few rules governing reporting. If the
company determines that a portion of all of the issued gift cards will never be used, they may write this
off to income. In some states, if a gift card remains unused, in part or in full, the unused portion of the
card is transferred to the state government. It is considered unclaimed property for the customer,
meaning that the company cannot keep these funds as revenue because, in this case, they have reverted
to the state government.

Short-Term Revenue Recognition Examples
As mentioned, the revenue recognition principle requires that, in some instances, revenue is recognized
before receiving a cash payment. In these situations, the customer still owes the company money. This money
owed to the company is a type of receivable for the company and a payable for the company’s customer.
A receivable is an outstanding amount owed from a customer. One specific receivable type is called accounts
receivable. Accounts receivable is an outstanding customer debt on a credit sale. The company expects to
receive payment on accounts receivable within the company’s operating period (less than a year). Accounts
receivable is considered an asset, and it typically does not include an interest payment from the customer.
Some view this account as extending a line of credit to a customer. The customer would then be sent an
invoice with credit payment terms. If the company has provided the product or service at the time of credit
extension, revenue would also be recognized.
For example, Billie’s Watercraft Warehouse (BWW) sells various watercraft vehicles. They extend a credit line to
customers purchasing vehicles in bulk. A customer bought 10 Jet Skis on credit at a sales price of $100,000. The
cost of the sale to BWW is $70,000. The following journal entries occur.

1 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). “Revenue from Contracts with Customers.” Revenue Recognition. n.d.
https://www.aicpa.org/interestareas/frc/accountingfinancialreporting/revenuerecognition.html
2 International Federation of Accountants (IFAC). “Roles and Importance of Professional Accountants in Business.” n.d. https://www.ifac.org/
news-events/2013-10/roles-and-importance-professional-accountants-business

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

581

Accounts Receivable increases (debit) and Sales Revenue increases (credit) for $100,000. Accounts Receivable
recognizes the amount owed from the customer, but not yet paid. Revenue recognition occurs because BWW
provided the Jet Skis and completed the earnings process. Cost of Goods Sold increases (debit) and
Merchandise Inventory decreases (credit) for $70,000, the expense associated with the sale. By recording both
a sale and its related cost entry, the matching principle requirement is met.
When the customer pays the amount owed, the following journal entry occurs.

Cash increases (debit) and Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) for the full amount owed. If the customer
made only a partial payment, the entry would reflect the amount of the payment. For example, if the customer
paid only $75,000 of the $100,000 owed, the following entry would occur. The remaining $25,000 owed would
remain outstanding, reflected in Accounts Receivable.

Another credit transaction that requires recognition is when a customer pays with a credit card (Visa and
MasterCard, for example). This is different from credit extended directly to the customer from the company. In
this case, the third-party credit card company accepts the payment responsibility. This reduces the risk of
nonpayment, increases opportunities for sales, and expedites payment on accounts receivable. The tradeoff
for the company receiving these benefits from the credit card company is that a fee is charged to use this
service. The fee can be a flat figure per transaction, or it can be a percentage of the sales price. Using BWW as
the example, let’s say one of its customers purchased a canoe for $300, using his or her Visa credit card. The
cost to BWW for the canoe is $150. Visa charges BWW a service fee equal to 5% of the sales price. At the time
of sale, the following journal entries are recorded.

582

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Accounts Receivable: Visa increases (debit) for the sale amount ($300) less the credit card fee ($15), for a $285
Accounts Receivable balance due from Visa. BWW’s Credit Card Expense increases (debit) for the amount of
the credit card fee ($15; 300 × 5%), and Sales Revenue increases (credit) for the original sales amount ($300).
BWW recognizes revenue as earned for this transaction because it provided the canoe and completed the
earnings process. Cost of Goods Sold increases (debit) and Merchandise Inventory decreases (credit) for $150,
the expense associated with the sale. As with the previous example, by recording both a sale and cost entry,
the matching principle requirement is met. When Visa pays the amount owed to BWW, the following entry
occurs in BMW’s records.

Cash increases (debit) and Accounts Receivable: Visa decreases (credit) for the full amount owed, less the
credit card fee. Once BWW receives the cash payment from Visa, it may use those funds in other business
activities.
An alternative to the journal entries shown is that the credit card company, in this case Visa, gives the
merchant immediate credit in its cash account for the $285 due the merchant, without creating an account
receivable. If that policy were in effect for this transaction, the following single journal entry would replace the
prior two journal entry transactions. In the immediate cash payment method, an account receivable would not
need to be recorded and then collected. The separate journal entry—to record the costs of goods sold and to
reduce the canoe inventory that reflects the $150 cost of the sale—would still be the same.

Here’s a final credit transaction to consider. A company allows a sales discount on a purchase if a customer
charges a purchase but makes the payment within a stated period of time, such as 10 or 15 days from the
point of sale. In such a situation, a customer would see credit terms in the following form: 2/10, n/30. This
particular example shows that a customer who pays his or her account within 10 days will receive a 2%
discount. Otherwise, the customer will have 30 days from the date of the purchase to pay in full, but will not
receive a discount. Both sales discounts and purchase discounts were addressed in detail in Merchandising

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

583

Transactions.

YOUR TURN
Maine Lobster Market
Maine Lobster Market (MLM) provides fresh seafood products to customers. It allows customers to pay with
cash, an in-house credit account, or a credit card. The credit card company charges Maine Lobster Market a 4%
fee, based on credit sales using its card. From the following transactions, prepare journal entries for Maine
Lobster Market.
Aug. 5

Pat paid $800 cash for lobster. The cost to MLM was $480.

Aug. 10

Pat purchased 30 pounds of shrimp at a sales price per pound of $25. The cost to MLM was
$18.50 per pound and is charged to Pat’s in-store account.

Aug. 19
Solution

Pat purchased $1,200 of fish with a credit card. The cost to MLM is $865.

584

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

YOUR TURN
Jamal’s Music Supply
Jamal’s Music Supply allows customers to pay with cash or a credit card. The credit card company charges
Jamal’s Music Supply a 3% fee, based on credit sales using its card. From the following transactions, prepare
journal entries for Jamal’s Music Supply.
May 10

Kerry paid $1,790 for music supplies with a credit card. The cost to Jamal’s Music Supply was
$1,100.

May 19

Kerry purchased 80 drumstick pairs at a sales price per pair of $14 with a credit card. The cost to
Jamal’s Music Supply was $7.30 per pair.

May 28

Kerry purchased $345 of music supplies with cash. The cost to Jamal’s Music Supply was $122.

Solution

9.2

Account for Uncollectible Accounts Using the Balance Sheet and Income

Statement Approaches
You lend a friend $500 with the agreement that you will be repaid in two months. At the end of two months,
your friend has not repaid the money. You continue to request the money each month, but the friend has yet
to repay the debt. How does this affect your finances?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

585

Think of this on a larger scale. A bank lends money to a couple purchasing a home (mortgage). The
understanding is that the couple will make payments each month toward the principal borrowed, plus interest.
As time passes, the loan goes unpaid. What happens when a loan that was supposed to be paid is not paid?
How does this affect the financial statements for the bank? The bank may need to consider ways to recognize
this bad debt.

Fundamentals of Bad Debt Expenses and Allowances for Doubtful Accounts
Bad debts are uncollectible amounts from customer accounts. Bad debt negatively affects accounts receivable
(see Figure 9.2). When future collection of receivables cannot be reasonably assumed, recognizing this
potential nonpayment is required. There are two methods a company may use to recognize bad debt: the
direct write-off method and the allowance method.

Figure 9.2

Bad Debt Expenses. Uncollectible customer accounts produce bad debt. (credit: modification of

“Past Due Bills” by “Maggiebug 21”/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)
The direct write-off method delays recognition of bad debt until the specific customer accounts receivable is
identified. Once this account is identified as uncollectible, the company will record a reduction to the
customer’s accounts receivable and an increase to bad debt expense for the exact amount uncollectible.
Under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), the direct write-off method is not an acceptable
method of recording bad debts, because it violates the matching principle. For example, assume that a credit
transaction occurs in September 2018 and is determined to be uncollectible in February 2019. The direct writeoff method would record the bad debt expense in 2019, while the matching principle requires that it be
associated with a 2018 transaction, which will better reflect the relationship between revenues and the
accompanying expenses. This matching issue is the reason accountants will typically use one of the two
accrual-based accounting methods introduced to account for bad debt expenses.
It is important to consider other issues in the treatment of bad debts. For example, when companies account
for bad debt expenses in their financial statements, they will use an accrual-based method; however, they are
required to use the direct write-off method on their income tax returns. This variance in treatment addresses
taxpayers’ potential to manipulate when a bad debt is recognized. Because of this potential manipulation, the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requires that the direct write-off method must be used when the debt is
determined to be uncollectible, while GAAP still requires that an accrual-based method be used for financial

586

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

accounting statements.
For the taxpayer, this means that if a company sells an item on credit in October 2018 and determines that it is
uncollectible in June 2019, it must show the effects of the bad debt when it files its 2019 tax return. This
application probably violates the matching principle, but if the IRS did not have this policy, there would
typically be a significant amount of manipulation on company tax returns. For example, if the company wanted
the deduction for the write-off in 2018, it might claim that it was actually uncollectible in 2018, instead of in
2019.
The final point relates to companies with very little exposure to the possibility of bad debts, typically, entities
that rarely offer credit to its customers. Assuming that credit is not a significant component of its sales, these
sellers can also use the direct write-off method. The companies that qualify for this exemption, however, are
typically small and not major participants in the credit market. Thus, virtually all of the remaining bad debt
expense material discussed here will be based on an allowance method that uses accrual accounting, the
matching principle, and the revenue recognition rules under GAAP.
For example, a customer takes out a $15,000 car loan on August 1, 2018 and is expected to pay the amount in
full before December 1, 2018. For the sake of this example, assume that there was no interest charged to the
buyer because of the short-term nature or life of the loan. When the account defaults for nonpayment on
December 1, the company would record the following journal entry to recognize bad debt.

Bad Debt Expense increases (debit), and Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) for $15,000. If, in the future,
any part of the debt is recovered, a reversal of the previously written-off bad debt, and the collection
recognition is required. Let’s say this customer unexpectedly pays in full on May 1, 2019, the company would
record the following journal entries (note that the company’s fiscal year ends on June 30)

The first entry reverses the bad debt write-off by increasing Accounts Receivable (debit) and decreasing Bad
Debt Expense (credit) for the amount recovered. The second entry records the payment in full with Cash
increasing (debit) and Accounts Receivable decreasing (credit) for the amount received of $15,000.
As you’ve learned, the delayed recognition of bad debt violates GAAP, specifically the matching principle.
Therefore, the direct write-off method is not used for publicly traded company reporting; the allowance
method is used instead.
The allowance method is the more widely used method because it satisfies the matching principle. The

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

587

allowance method estimates bad debt during a period, based on certain computational approaches. The
calculation matches bad debt with related sales during the period. The estimation is made from past
experience and industry standards. When the estimation is recorded at the end of a period, the following entry
occurs.

The journal entry for the Bad Debt Expense increases (debit) the expense’s balance, and the Allowance for
Doubtful Accounts increases (credit) the balance in the Allowance. The allowance for doubtful accounts is a
contra asset account and is subtracted from Accounts Receivable to determine the Net Realizable Value of
the Accounts Receivable account on the balance sheet. A contra account has an opposite normal balance to
its paired account, thereby reducing or increasing the balance in the paired account at the end of a period; the
adjustment can be an addition or a subtraction from a controlling account. In the case of the allowance for
doubtful accounts, it is a contra account that is used to reduce the Controlling account, Accounts Receivable.
At the end of an accounting period, the Allowance for Doubtful Accounts reduces the Accounts Receivable to
produce Net Accounts Receivable. Note that allowance for doubtful accounts reduces the overall accounts
receivable account, not a specific accounts receivable assigned to a customer. Because it is an estimation, it
means the exact account that is (or will become) uncollectible is not yet known.
To demonstrate the treatment of the allowance for doubtful accounts on the balance sheet, assume that a
company has reported an Accounts Receivable balance of $90,000 and a Balance in the Allowance of Doubtful
Accounts of $4,800. The following table reflects how the relationship would be reflected in the current (shortterm) section of the company’s Balance Sheet.

There is one more point about the use of the contra account, Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. In this
example, the $85,200 total is the net realizable value, or the amount of accounts anticipated to be collected.
However, the company is owed $90,000 and will still try to collect the entire $90,000 and not just the $85,200.
Under the balance sheet method of calculating bad debt expenses, if there is already a balance in Allowance
for Doubtful Accounts from a previous period and accounts written off in the current year, this must be
considered before the adjusting entry is made. For example, if a company already had a credit balance from
the prior period of $1,000, plus any accounts that have been written off this year, and a current period
estimated balance of $2,500, the company would need to subtract the prior period’s credit balance from the
current period’s estimated credit balance in order to calculate the amount to be added to the Allowance for
Doubtful Accounts.

588

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Therefore, the adjusting journal entry would be as follows.

If a company already had a debit balance from the prior period of $1,000, and a current period estimated
balance of $2,500, the company would need to add the prior period’s debit balance to the current period’s
estimated credit balance.

Therefore, the adjusting journal entry would be as follows.

When a specific customer has been identified as an uncollectible account, the following journal entry would
occur.

Allowance for Doubtful Accounts decreases (debit) and Accounts Receivable for the specific customer also
decreases (credit). Allowance for doubtful accounts decreases because the bad debt amount is no longer
unclear. Accounts receivable decreases because there is an assumption that no debt will be collected on the
identified customer’s account.
Let’s say that the customer unexpectedly pays on the account in the future. The following journal entries
would occur.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

589

The first entry reverses the previous entry where bad debt was written off. This reinstatement requires
Accounts Receivable: Customer to increase (debit), and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts to increase (credit).
The second entry records the payment on the account. Cash increases (debit) and Accounts Receivable:
Customer decreases (credit) for the amount received.
To compute the most accurate estimation possible, a company may use one of three methods for bad debt
expense recognition: the income statement method, balance sheet method, or balance sheet aging of
receivables method.

THINK IT THROUGH
Bad Debt Estimation
As the accountant for a large publicly traded food company, you are considering whether or not you
need to change your bad debt estimation method. You currently use the income statement method to
estimate bad debt at 4.5% of credit sales. You are considering switching to the balance sheet aging of
receivables method. This would split accounts receivable into three past- due categories and assign a
percentage to each group.
While you know that the balance sheet aging of receivables method is more accurate, it does require
more company resources (e.g., time and money) that are currently applied elsewhere in the business.
Using the income statement method is acceptable under generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP), but should you switch to the more accurate method even if your resources are constrained? Do
you have a responsibility to the public to change methods if you know one is a better estimation?

Income Statement Method for Calculating Bad Debt Expenses
The income statement method (also known as the percentage of sales method) estimates bad debt
expenses based on the assumption that at the end of the period, a certain percentage of sales during the
period will not be collected. The estimation is typically based on credit sales only, not total sales (which include
cash sales). In this example, assume that any credit card sales that are uncollectible are the responsibility of
the credit card company. It may be obvious intuitively, but, by definition, a cash sale cannot become a bad
debt, assuming that the cash payment did not entail counterfeit currency. The income statement method is a
simple method for calculating bad debt, but it may be more imprecise than other measures because it does
not consider how long a debt has been outstanding and the role that plays in debt recovery.
To illustrate, let’s continue to use Billie’s Watercraft Warehouse (BWW) as the example. Billie’s end-of-year
credit sales totaled $458,230. BWW estimates that 5% of its overall credit sales will result in bad debt. The
following adjusting journal entry for bad debt occurs.

590

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Bad Debt Expense increases (debit), and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts increases (credit) for $22,911.50
($458,230 × 5%). This means that BWW believes $22,911.50 will be uncollectible debt. Let’s say that on April 8, it
was determined that Customer Robert Craft’s account was uncollectible in the amount of $5,000. The following
entry occurs.

In this case, Allowance for Doubtful Accounts decreases (debit) and Accounts Receivable: Craft decreases
(credit) for the known uncollectible amount of $5,000. On June 5, Craft unexpectedly makes a partial payment
on his account in the amount of $3,000. The following journal entries show the reinstatement of bad debt and
the subsequent payment.

The outstanding balance of $2,000 that Craft did not repay will remain as bad debt.

YOUR TURN
Heating and Air Company
You run a successful heating and air conditioning company. Your net credit sales, accounts receivable, and
allowance for doubtful accounts figures for year-end 2018, follow.

A. Compute bad debt estimation using the income statement method, where the percentage
uncollectible is 5%.
B. Prepare the journal entry for the income statement method of bad debt estimation.
C. Compute bad debt estimation using the balance sheet method of percentage of receivables, where
the percentage uncollectible is 9%.
D. Prepare the journal entry for the balance sheet method bad debt estimation.
Solution
A. $41,570; $831,400 × 5%

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

591

B.

C. $20,056.50; $222,850 × 9%
D.

Balance Sheet Method for Calculating Bad Debt Expenses
The balance sheet method (also known as the percentage of accounts receivable method) estimates bad
debt expenses based on the balance in accounts receivable. The method looks at the balance of accounts
receivable at the end of the period and assumes that a certain amount will not be collected. Accounts
receivable is reported on the balance sheet; thus, it is called the balance sheet method. The balance sheet
method is another simple method for calculating bad debt, but it too does not consider how long a debt has
been outstanding and the role that plays in debt recovery. There is a variation on the balance sheet method,
however, called the aging method that does consider how long accounts receivable have been owed, and it
assigns a greater potential for default to those debts that have been owed for the longest period of time.
Continuing our examination of the balance sheet method, assume that BWW’s end-of-year accounts
receivable balance totaled $324,850. This entry assumes a zero balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
from the prior period. BWW estimates 15% of its overall accounts receivable will result in bad debt. The
following adjusting journal entry for bad debt occurs.

Bad Debt Expense increases (debit), and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts increases (credit) for $48,727.50
($324,850 × 15%). This means that BWW believes $48,727.50 will be uncollectible debt. Let’s consider that BWW
had a $23,000 credit balance from the previous period. The adjusting journal entry would recognize the
following.

592

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

This is different from the last journal entry, where bad debt was estimated at $48,727.50. That journal entry
assumed a zero balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts from the prior period. This journal entry takes into
account a credit balance of $23,000 and subtracts the prior period’s balance from the estimated balance in the
current period of $48,727.50.

Balance Sheet Aging of Receivables Method for Calculating Bad Debt Expenses
The balance sheet aging of receivables method estimates bad debt expenses based on the balance in
accounts receivable, but it also considers the uncollectible time period for each account. The longer the time
passes with a receivable unpaid, the lower the probability that it will get collected. An account that is 90 days
overdue is more likely to be unpaid than an account that is 30 days past due.
With this method, accounts receivable is organized into categories by length of time outstanding, and an
uncollectible percentage is assigned to each category. The length of uncollectible time increases the
percentage assigned. For example, a category might consist of accounts receivable that is 0–30 days past due
and is assigned an uncollectible percentage of 6%. Another category might be 31–60 days past due and is
assigned an uncollectible percentage of 15%. All categories of estimated uncollectible amounts are summed to
get a total estimated uncollectible balance. That total is reported in Bad Debt Expense and Allowance for
Doubtful Accounts, if there is no carryover balance from a prior period. If there is a carryover balance, that
must be considered before recording Bad Debt Expense. The balance sheet aging of receivables method is
more complicated than the other two methods, but it tends to produce more accurate results. This is because
it considers the amount of time that accounts receivable has been owed, and it assumes that the longer the
time owed, the greater the possibility that individual accounts receivable will prove to be uncollectible.
Looking at BWW, it has an accounts receivable balance of $324,850 at the end of the year. The company splits
its past-due accounts into three categories: 0–30 days past due, 31–90 days past due, and over 90 days past
due. The uncollectible percentages and the accounts receivable breakdown are shown here.

For each of the individual categories, the accountant multiplies the uncollectible percentage by the accounts
receivable total for that category to get the total balance of estimated accounts that will prove to be

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

593

uncollectible for that category. Then all of the category estimates are added together to get one total
estimated uncollectible balance for the period. The entry for bad debt would be as follows, if there was no
carryover balance from the prior period.

Bad Debt Expense increases (debit) as does Allowance for Doubtful Accounts (credit) for $58,097. BWW
believes that $58,097 will be uncollectible debt.
Let’s consider a situation where BWW had a $20,000 debit balance from the previous period. The adjusting
journal entry would recognize the following.

This is different from the last journal entry, where bad debt was estimated at $58,097. That journal entry
assumed a zero balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts from the prior period. This journal entry takes into
account a debit balance of $20,000 and adds the prior period’s balance to the estimated balance of $58,097 in
the current period.

You may notice that all three methods use the same accounts for the adjusting entry; only the method
changes the financial outcome. Also note that it is a requirement that the estimation method be disclosed in
the notes of financial statements so stakeholders can make informed decisions.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
As of January 1, 2018, GAAP requires a change in how health-care entities record bad debt expense.
Before this change, these entities would record revenues for billed services, even if they did not expect to
collect any payment from the patient. This uncollectible amount would then be reported in Bad Debt
Expense. Under the new guidance, the bad debt amount may only be recorded if there is an unexpected
circumstance that prevented the patient from paying the bill, and it may only be calculated from the
amount that the providing entity anticipated collecting.

594

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

For example, a patient receives medical services at a local hospital that cost $1,000. The hospital knows in
advance that the patient will pay only $100 of the amount owed. The previous GAAP rules would allow
the company to write off $900 to bad debt. Under the current rule, the company may only consider
revenue to be the expected amount of $100. For example, if the patient ran into an unexpected job loss
and is able to pay only $20 of the $100 expected, the hospital would record the $20 to revenue and the
$80 ($100 – $20) as a write-off to bad debt. This is a significant change in revenue reporting and bad debt
expense. Health-care entities will more than likely see a decrease in bad debt expense and revenues as a
result of this change.

9.3

[3]

Determine the Efficiency of Receivables Management Using Financial

Ratios
You received an unexpected tax refund this year and want to invest the money in a profitable and growing
company. After conducting research, you determine that it is important for a company to collect on
outstanding debt quickly, while showing a willingness to offer customers credit options to increase sales
opportunities, among other things. You are new to investing, so where do you begin?
Stakeholders, such as investors, lenders, and management, look to financial statement data to make informed
decisions about a company’s financial position. They will look at each statement—as well as ratio analysis—for
trends, industry comparisons, and past performance to help make financing determinations. Because you are
reviewing companies for quick debt collection, as well as credit extension to boost sales, you would consider
receivables ratios to guide your decision. Discuss the Role of Accounting for Receivables in Earnings
Management will explain and demonstrate two popular ratios—the accounts receivable turnover ratio and the
number of days’ sales in receivables ratio—used to evaluate a company’s receivables experiences.
It is important to remember, however, that for a comprehensive evaluation of a company’s true potential as
an investment, you need to consider other types of ratios, in addition to the receivables ratios. For example,
you might want to look at the company’s profitability, solvency, and liquidity performances using ratios. (See
Appendix A for more information on ratios.)

3 Tara Bannow. “New Bad Debt Accounting Standards Likely to Remake Community Benefit Reporting.” Modern Healthcare. March 17, 2018.
http://www.modernhealthcare.com/article/20180317/NEWS/180319904

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Figure 9.3

595

Which Company Is the Best Investment? Receivables ratios can help make this determination.

(credit: “Black Laptop Computer Showing Stock Graph” by “Negative Space”/Pexels, CC0)

Basic Functions of the Receivables Ratios
Receivables ratios show company performance in relation to current debt collection, as well as credit policy
effect on sales growth. One receivables ratio is called the accounts receivable turnover ratio. This ratio
determines how many times (i.e., how often) accounts receivable are collected during an operating period and
converted to cash (see Figure 9.3). A higher number of times indicates that receivables are collected quickly.
This quick cash collection may be viewed as a positive occurrence, because liquidity improves, and the
company may reinvest in its business sooner when the value of the dollar has more buying power (time value
of money). The higher number of times may also be a negative occurrence, signaling that credit extension
terms are too tight, and it may exclude qualified consumers from purchasing. Excluding these customers
means that they may take their business to a competitor, thus reducing potential sales.
In contrast, a lower number of times indicates that receivables are collected at a slower rate. A slower
collection rate could signal that lending terms are too lenient; management might consider tightening lending
opportunities and more aggressively pursuing outstanding debt. The lower turnover also shows that the
company has cash tied up in receivable longer, thus hindering its ability to reinvest this cash in other current
projects. The lower turnover rate may signal a high level of bad debt accounts. The determination of a high or
low turnover rate really depends on the standards of the company’s industry.
Another receivables ratio one must consider is the number of days’ sales in receivables ratio. This ratio is
similar to accounts receivable turnover in that it shows the expected days it will take to convert accounts
receivable into cash. The reflected outcome is in number of days, rather than in number of times.
Companies often have outstanding debt that requires scheduled payments. If it takes longer for a company to
collect on outstanding receivables, this means it may not be able to meet its current obligations. It helps to
know the number of days it takes to go through the accounts receivable collection cycle so a company can
plan its debt repayments; this receivables ratio also signals how efficient its collection procedures are. As with
the accounts receivable turnover ratio, there are positive and negative elements with a smaller and larger
amount of days; in general, the fewer number of collection days on accounts receivable, the better.
To illustrate the use of these ratios to make financial decisions, let’s use Billie’s Watercraft Warehouse (BWW)
as the example. Included are the comparative income statement (Figure 9.4) and the comparative balance
sheet (Figure 9.5) for BWW, followed by competitor ratio information, for the years 2016, 2017, and 2018 as
shown in Table 9.1.

596

Figure 9.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Comparative Income Statements for Billie’s Watercraft Warehouse for the Years 2016, 2017, and

2018. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Figure 9.5

Comparative Income Statements for Billie’s Watercraft Warehouse for the Years 2016, 2017, and

2018. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Comparison of Ratios: Industry Competitor to BWW
Year

Accounts Receivable Turnover Ratio

Number of Days’ Sales in Receivables Ratio

2016

4.89 times

80 days

2017

4.92 times

79.23 days

2018

5.25 times

76.44 days

Table 9.1 Industry Competitor Ratios for the years 2016, 2017, and 2018.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

597

YOUR TURN
The Investor
You are an investor looking to contribute financially to either Company A or Company B. The following
select financial information follows.

Based on the information provided:
• Compute the accounts receivable turnover ratio
• Compute the number of days’ sales in receivables ratio for both Company A and Company B (round
all answers to two decimal places)
• Interpret the outcomes, stating which company you would invest in and why
Solution
Company A: ART = 8.46 times, Days’ Sales = 43.14 days, Company B: ART = 6.13 times, Days’ Sales = 59.54
days. Upon initial review of this limited information, Company A seems to be the better choice, since their
turnover ratio is higher and the collection time is lower with 43.14 days. One might want more
information on trends for each company with these ratios and a comparison to others in the same
industry. More information is needed before making an informed decision.

Accounts Receivable Turnover Ratio
The ratio to determine accounts receivable turnover is as follows.

Net credit sales are sales made on credit only; cash sales are not included because they do not produce
receivables. However, many companies do not report credit sales separate from cash sales, so “net sales” may
be substituted for “net credit sales” in this case. Beginning and ending accounts receivable refer to the
beginning and ending balances in accounts receivable for the period. The beginning accounts receivable
balance is the same figure as the ending accounts receivable balance from the prior period.
Use this formula to compute BWW’s accounts receivable turnover for 2017 and 2018.
The accounts receivable turnover ratio for 2017 is 5 × ($400,000/$80,000). Net credit sales for 2017 are
$400,000, so

598

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Average accounts receivable =

($70,000 + $90,000)
= $80,000
2

The accounts receivable turnover ratio for 2018 is 5.14 times (rounded to two decimal places). Net credit sales
for 2018 are $450,000, so

Average accounts receivable =

($90,000 + $85,000)
= $87,500
2

The outcome for 2017 means that the company turns over receivables (converts receivables into cash) 5 times
during the year. The outcome for 2018 shows that BWW converts cash at a quicker rate of 5.14 times. There is
a trend increase from 2017 to 2018. BWW sells various watercraft. These products tend to have a higher sales
price, making a customer more likely to pay with credit. This can also increase the length of debt repayment.
Comparing to another company in the industry, BWW’s turnover rate is standard. To increase the turnover
rate, BWW can consider extending credit to more customers who the company has determined will pay on a
quicker basis or schedule, or BWW can more aggressively pursue the outstanding debt from current
customers.

Number of Days’ Sales in Receivables Ratio
The ratio to determine number of days’ sales in receivables is as follows.

The numerator is 365, the number of days in the year. Because the accounts receivable turnover ratio
determines an average accounts receivable figure, the outcome for the days’ sales in receivables is also an
average number. Using this formula, compute BWW’s number of days’ sales in receivables ratio for 2017 and
2018.
The ratio for 2017 is 73 days (365/5), and for 2018 is 71.01 days (365/5.14), rounded. This means it takes 73 days
in 2017 and 71.01 days in 2018 to complete the collection cycle, which is a decrease from 2017 to 2018. A
downward trend is a positive for the company, and BWW outperforms the competition slightly. This is good
because BWW can use the cash toward other business expenditures, or the downward trend could signal that
the company needs to loosen credit terms or more aggressively collect outstanding accounts.
Looking at both ratios, BWW seems well positioned within the industry, and a potential investor or lender may
be more apt to contribute financially to the organization with this continued positive trend.

LINK TO LEARNING
American Superconductor Corporation specializes in the production and service of energy-efficient wind
turbine systems, as well as energy grid construction solutions. On the company’s 2018–2019 financial
statements, the accounts receivable turnover ratio is approximately 6.32 times, and the number of day’s
sales in receivables ratio is approximately 58 days. This site providing American Superconductor
Corporation’s current financial statements (https://openstax.org/l/50AMSCfinan2017) is available for

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

599

review.

9.4

Discuss the Role of Accounting for Receivables in Earnings Management

Assume that you are an accountant at a large public corporation and are on a team responsible for preparing
financial statements. In one team discussion, a dilemma arises: What is the best way to report earnings to
create the most favorable possible financial position for your company, while still complying in an ethical
manner and also complying fully with generally accepted accounting procedures (GAAP)? Your company is
required to follow GAAP rules, but is there a way to comply with these rules while showing the company in its
best light? How does receivables accounting factor into this quandary?
Before examining potential ways to improve the company’s financial image, let’s consider some important
conditions. To begin, if the company is publicly traded on a national or regional stock exchange, it is subject to
the accounting and financial regulations set by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Included in
these rules is the requirement that each publicly traded company must prepare and make public each year its
annual report, including the results of an extensive audit procedure performed by a major public accounting
firm.
In the process of auditing the company, the auditing firm will conduct tests to determine whether, in the
auditor’s opinion, the financial statements accurately reflect the financial position of the company. If the
auditor feels that transactions, financial schedules, or other records do not accurately reflect the company’s
performance for the past year, then the auditor can issue a negative audit report, which could have major
negative effects on the company’s image in the financial community.
To sum up this issue, any attempts by companies to make their financial position look better must be based on
assumptions by the company that can be verified by an outside, independent party, such as a major public
accounting firm. As you learn about this topic, assume that any recommendations suggested must be
legitimate changes in assumptions by the company and that the recommendations will pass public
examination and scrutiny.
Earnings management works within GAAP constraints to improve stakeholders’ views of the company’s
financial position. Earnings manipulation is noticeably different in that it typically ignores GAAP rules to alter
earnings significantly. Carried to an extreme, manipulation can lead to fraudulent behavior by a company. The
major problem in income manipulation is not in manipulating the numbers that constitute the financial
reports. Instead, the bigger issue is the engineering of the short-term financial operating decisions. Some of
the techniques used include applying universal standards, loose interpretations of revenue recognition,
unofficial earnings measures, fair value accounting, and cooking the decision and not the books.

[4]

A company may be enticed to manipulate earnings for several reasons. It may want to show a healthier
income level, meet or exceed market expectations, and receive management bonuses. This can produce more
investment interest from potential investors. An increase to receivables and inventory can help a business to
secure more borrowed funds.

4 H. David Sherman and S. David Young. “Where Financial Reporting Still Falls Short.” Harvard Business Review. July-August 2016.
https://hbr.org/2016/07/where-financial-reporting-still-falls-short

600

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Improper Revenue Recognition Leads to New Accounting Laws and Regulations
The complete financial collapse of the Enron Corporation was a catalyst for major changes in the
accounting profession. Fraudulent revenue recognition and financial statement manipulation at
Enron—an energy, commodities, and services company—helped provide support for the implementation
of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX). A federal law, SOX included the creation of the Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), a regulatory agency to oversee auditors and ensure compliance
with SOX requirements.
The PCAOB is charged by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 with establishing auditing and professional
practice standards for registered public accounting firms to follow in the preparation and issuing of audit
reports.

[5]

The PCAOB regulates how publicly traded companies are audited and provides requirements

and ethical standards that direct professional accountants in their work with publicly traded companies.
Visit their website at www.pcaobus.org to learn more.

Accounts receivable may also be manipulated to delay revenue recognition. These deferred earnings allow for
a reduced tax obligation in the current year. A company involved in the sale or acquisition of a business may
show a higher income level to increase the value of the business. Whatever the reason, a company often has
the flexibility to manage their earnings slightly, given the amount of estimations and potential bad debt writeoffs required to meet the revenue recognition and matching principles.
One area of estimation involves bad debt in relation to accounts receivable. As you’ve learned, the income
statement method, balance sheet method, and the balance sheet aging method all require estimations of bad
debt with receivables. The percentage uncollectible is supposed to be presented as an educated estimation
based on past performance, industry standards, and other economic factors. However, this estimation is just
that—an estimation—and it can be slightly manipulated or managed to overstate or understate bad debt, as
well as accounts receivable. For example, a company does not usually benefit from bad debt write-off. It might
legitimately—if past experience justifies the change—alter past-due dates to current accounts to avoid having
to write off bad debt. This overstates accounts receivable and understates bad debt. The company could also
change the percentage uncollectible to a lower or higher figure, if its financial information and the present
economic environment justify the change. The company could change the percentage from 2% uncollectible to
1% uncollectible. This increases accounts receivable and potential earnings and reduces bad debt expenses in
the current period.

LINK TO LEARNING
The Beneish M-Score is an earnings manipulation measurement system that incorporates eight financial
ratios to identify potentially compromised companies. In 2000, a group of students from Cornell
University used this measurement to sell all the “Cayuga Fund” stock holdings in Enron, one year before
the total collapse of company. Read this article on the Cornell University Enron Case Study
(https://openstax.org/l/50CornellEnron) to learn more.

5

Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). “Standards.” n.d. https://pcaobus.org/Standards

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

601

Let’s take Billie’s Watercraft Warehouse (BWW), for example. BWW had the following net credit sales and
accounts receivable from 2016–2018.

It also used the following percentage calculations for doubtful accounts under each bad debt estimation
method.

Legitimate current economic conditions could allow BWW to alter its estimation percentages, aging categories,
and method used. Altering estimation percentages could mean an increase or decrease in percentages. If
BWW decreases its income statement method percentage from 5% of credit sales to 4% of credit sales, the bad
debt estimation would go from $22,500 (5% × $450,000) in 2018 to $18,000 (4% × $450,000). The bad debt
expense would decrease for the period, and net income would increase. If BWW decreases its balance sheet
method percentage from 15% of accounts receivable to 12% of accounts receivable, the bad debt estimation
would go from $12,750 (15% × $85,000) in 2018 to $10,200 (12% × $85,000). The bad debt expense would
decrease for the period and net income would increase. Accounts receivable would also increase, and
allowances for doubtful accounts would decrease. As mentioned, this increase to earnings and asset increase
is attractive to investors and lenders.
Another earnings management opportunity may occur with the balance sheet aging method. Past-due
categories could expand to encompass greater (or fewer) time periods, accounts receivable balances could be
placed in different categories, or estimation percentages could change for each category. However, please
remember that such changes would need to be considered acceptable by the company’s outside auditors
during the annual independent audit.
To demonstrate the recommendation, assume that BWW has three categories: 0–30 days past due, 31–90 days
past due, and over 90 days past due. These categories could change to 0–60 days, 61–120 days, and over 120
days. This could move accounts that previously had a higher bad debt percentage assigned to them into a
lower percentage category. This category shift could produce an increase to accounts receivable, and a
decrease to bad debt expense; thus, increasing net income estimation percentages can change within each
category. The following is the original uncollectible distribution for BWW in 2018.

The following is the uncollectible percentage distribution change.

602

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Comparing the two outcomes, the original uncollectible figure was $15,500 and the changed uncollectible
figure is $12,450. This reduction produces a higher accounts receivable balance, a lower bad debt expense, and
a higher net income.
A company may also change the estimation method to produce a different net income outcome. For example,
BWW may go from the income statement method to the balance sheet method. However, as mentioned, the
change would have to be considered to reflect the company’s actual bad debt experiences accurately, and not
just made for the sake of manipulating the income and expenses reported on their financial statements. A
change in the estimation method that provides a comparison of the 2018 income statement follows.

In this example, net income appears higher under the balance sheet method than the income statement
method: $280,000 compared to $289,750, respectively. BWW could change to the balance sheet method for
estimating bad debt to give the appearance that income is greater. An investor or lender looking at BWW may
consider providing funds given the earnings performance, unaware that the estimation method alone may
result in an inflated income. So, what can an investor or lender do to recognize earnings management (or
manipulation)?
An investor or lender can compare ratio analysis to others in the industry, and year-to-year trend analysis can
be helpful. The number of days’ sales in receivables ratio is a usually a good indicator of manipulation activity.
A quicker collection period found in the first two years of operation can signal negative earnings behavior (as
compared to industry standards). Earnings management can be a bit more difficult, given its acceptability
under GAAP. As with uncovering earnings manipulation, due diligence with ratio and trend analysis is
paramount. These topics will be covered in more depth in Appendix A: Financial Statement Analysis.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Competitor Acquisitions
As companies become large players in industry, they may consider acquiring competitors. When
acquisition discussions occur, financial information, future growth channels, and business organizational
structure play heavy roles in the decision process. A level of financial transparency is expected with an
acquisition candidate, but during buying negotiations, each business will present the best financial
position possible. The seller’s goal is to yield a high sales price; the desire to present a rosy picture could
lead to earnings manipulation. An acquirer needs to be mindful of this and review trend analysis and

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

603

ratio comparisons before making a purchase decision.
Consider General Electric Company (GE). GE’s growth model in recent years was based on acquiring
additional businesses within the industry. The company did not do its due diligence on several
acquisitions, including Baker Hughes, and it was misled to believe the acquired businesses were in a
stable financial earnings position. The acquisitions led to a declining financial position and reduced stock
price. In order for GE to restructure and return to a positive growth model, it had to sell its interests in
Baker Hughes and other acquisitions that were underperforming based on expectations.

9.5

Apply Revenue Recognition Principles to Long-Term Projects

While most receivable reporting is straightforward when recognizing revenue and matching expenses in the
same period, a few unique situations require special revenue distribution for long-term projects. Long-term
construction-company projects, real estate installment sales, multi-year magazine subscriptions, and a
combined equipment sale with an accompanying service contract have special reporting requirements to meet
revenue recognition and matching principles.
Long-term construction projects, such as construction of a major sports stadium, can take several years to
complete. Typically, revenue is recognized when the earnings process is complete; however, if the construction
project did not begin work immediately, this could delay recognition of revenue, and expenses accumulated
during the period would be unmatched. These unmatched expenses can misstate financial statements
(particularly the income statement) and mislead stakeholders. There are also tax implications, where a
company may benefit from tax breaks with reduced earnings.
Two methods can be applied to long-term construction projects that are consistent with the revenue
recognition criteria you’ve learned about. The methods commonly utilized by construction contractors are the
percentage of completion and completed contract (see Figure 9.6). The percentage of completion method
takes the percentage of work completed for the period and divides that by the total revenues from the
contract. The percentage of work completed for the period distributes the estimated total project costs over
the contract term based on the actual completion amount, up to that point. The percentage can be based on
such factors as percentage of anticipated final costs incurred at a given point or an engineering report that
estimates the percentage of completion of the project at a stage of production.

604

Figure 9.6

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Long-Term Construction Project. Revenue recognition requires use of the percentage of

completion or completion contract method. (credit: modification of “Construction of Millennium Stadium,
Cardiff” by Seth Whales/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
The completed contract method delays reporting of both revenues and expenses until the entire contract is
complete. This can create reporting issues and is typically used only where cost and earnings cannot be
reasonably estimated throughout the contract term.
Unlike most residential home loan transactions (usually labeled as mortgage loans), which tend to require
monthly payments, commercial real estate sales are often structured as an installment sale (see Figure 9.7)
and usually involve periodic installment payments from buyers. These payments can be structured with annual
payments, interest-only payments, or any other payment format to which the parties agree.

Figure 9.7

Real Estate Installment Sales. Revenue recognition requires use of the installment method to

account for long-term risk. (credit: modification of “Boost-the-Market-Value-of-Your-Home_L” by Dan Moyle/
Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
However, a seller/lender has no guarantee that the buyer will pay the debt in its entirety. In this event, the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

605

property serves as security for the seller/lender if legal action is taken. The longer the debt remains
outstanding, the higher the risk the buyer will not complete payment. With traditional accrual accounting, risk
is not considered and revenue is reported immediately. The installment method accounts for risk and defers
revenue using a gross profit percentage. As installment payments are made, this percentage is applied to the
current period.
Multi-year magazine subscriptions are long-term service contracts with payment usually occurring in advance
of any provided service. The company may not recognize this revenue until the subscription has been
provided, but there is also no guarantee that the contract will be honored in its entirety at the conditions
expected. Financial Accounting Standards Board, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, requires
businesses to report revenue “in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be
entitled in exchange for the goods or services.”

[6]

Thus, once a change occurs to the expected revenue

distribution, this new amount is recorded going forward.
A combined equipment purchase with an accompanying service contract requires separate reporting of the
sale and service contract. An example of this is a cell phone purchase that has a service contract (warranty) for
any damage to the unit. There is no guarantee that damage will occur or that service will be provided, but the
customer has purchased this policy as insurance. Thus, the company must reasonably estimate this revenue
each period and distribute this estimation over the life of the service contract. Or, the company may wait until
the contract expires before reporting any revenue or expenses associated with the service contract.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
U.S. Bank Stadium Construction
HKS, Inc. received a construction contract from the Minnesota Sports Facilities Authority to build the new
U.S. Bank Stadium. The construction contract services began in 2012, but the stadium was not complete
until 2016. The total construction cost was approximately $1.129 billion.
The portion of construction revenues earned by HKS, Inc. could not be reported upon initial receipt of
funds but were instead distributed using the percentage of completion method. Much of the costs and
completion associated with building the stadium occurred in the later years of the project (specifically
2015); thus, the company experienced a sharp increase in percentage of completion in the 2015 period.
This showed a substantial increase to revenues during this period.

IFRS CONNECTION
Revenue and Receivables
When Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) and International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)
began their joint work to create converged standards, a primary goal was to develop a single,
comprehensive revenue recognition standard. At the time work began, International Financial Reporting
Stands (IFRS) had one general standard that was applied to all companies with little guidance for various

6 Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606).” FASB Accounting Standards Update,
Financial Accounting Series. April 2016. https://asc.fasb.org/imageRoot/32/79982032.pdf

606

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

industries or different revenue scenarios. On the other hand, U.S. generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP) had more than 100 standards that applied to revenue recognition. Because of the
global nature of business, including investing and borrowing, it was important to increase the
comparability of revenue measurement and reporting. After years of work, a new standard was agreed
upon; both FASB and IASB released a revenue recognition standard that is essentially the same, with only
a few differences. In the United States, the new revenue recognition standards became effective for
reporting in 2018 for publicly traded companies.
A few differences remain in the reporting of revenue. In accounting for long-term projects, IFRS does not
allow the completed contract method. If estimating the percentage of completion of the project is not
possible, IFRS allows revenues equal to costs to be recognized. This results in no profit recognized in the
current period, but rather all profit being deferred until the completion of the project.
Receivables represent amounts owed to the business from sales or service activities that have been
charged or loans that have been made to customers or others. Proper reporting of receivables is
important because it affects ratios used in the analysis of a company’s solvency and liquidity, and also
because reporting of receivables should reflect future cash receipts.
Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, receivables are reported as either current or noncurrent assets
depending on when they are due. Also, receivables that do not have an interest component are carried at
net realizable value or the amount the company expects to receive for the receivable. This requires
estimation and reporting of an allowance for uncollectible accounts (sometimes referred to as
“provisions” under IFRS). However, receivables that do have a significant financing component are
reported at amortized cost adjusted for an estimate of uncollectible accounts.
GAAP and IFRS can differ in the financial statement presentation of receivables. GAAP requires a liquidity
presentation on the balance sheet, meaning assets are listed in order of liquidity (those assets most
easily converted into cash to those assets least easily converted to cash). Thus, receivables—particularly
accounts receivable, which are highly liquid—are presented right after cash. However, IFRS allows
reverse liquidity presentation. Therefore, receivables may appear as one of the last items in the asset
section of the balance sheet under IFRS. This requires careful observance of the presentation being used
when comparing a company reporting under U.S. GAAP to one using IFRS when assessing receivables.
In the case of notes receivable, the method for estimating uncollectible accounts differs between U.S.
GAAP and IFRS. IFRS estimates uncollectible accounts on notes receivable in a three-level process,
depending upon whether the note receivable has maintained its original credit risk, increased slightly in
credit risk, or increased significantly in riskiness. For companies using U.S. GAAP, estimated uncollectible
accounts are based on the overall lifetime riskiness.

9.6

Explain How Notes Receivable and Accounts Receivable Differ

So far, our discussion of receivables has focused solely on accounts receivable. Companies, however, can
expand their business models to include more than one type of receivable. This receivable expansion allows a
company to attract a more diverse clientele and increase asset potential to further grow the business.
As you’ve learned, accounts receivable is typically a more informal arrangement between a company and
customer that is resolved within a year and does not include interest payments. In contrast, notes receivable
(an asset) is a more formal legal contract between the buyer and the company, which requires a specific
payment amount at a predetermined future date. The length of contract is typically over a year, or beyond one

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

607

operating cycle. There is also generally an interest requirement because the financial loan amount may be
larger than accounts receivable, and the length of contract is possibly longer. A note can be requested or
extended in exchange for products and services or in exchange for cash (usually in the case of a financial
lender). Several characteristics of notes receivable further define the contract elements and scope of use.
Key Feature Comparison of Accounts Receivable and Notes Receivable
Accounts Receivable
• An informal agreement between customer
and company
• Receivable in less than one year or within a
company’s operating cycle
• Does not include interest

Notes Receivable
• A legal contract with established payment
terms
• Receivable beyond one year and outside of a
company’s operating cycle
• Includes interest

Table 9.2

THINK IT THROUGH
Dishonored Note
You are the owner of a retail health food store and have several large companies with whom you do
business. Many competitors in your industry are vying for your customers’ business. For each sale, you
issue a notes receivable to the company, with an interest rate of 10% and a maturity date 18 months after
the issue date. Each note has a minimum principal amount of $500,000.
Let’s say one of these companies is unable to pay in the established timeframe and dishonors the note.
What would you do? How does this dishonored note affect your company both financially and
nonfinancially? If your customer wanted to renegotiate the terms of the agreement, would you agree? If
so, what would be the terms?

Characteristics of Notes Receivable
Notes receivable have several defining characteristics that include principal, length of contract terms, and
interest. The principal of a note is the initial loan amount, not including interest, requested by the customer. If
a customer approaches a lender, requesting $2,000, this amount is the principal. The date on which the
security agreement is initially established is the issue date. A note’s maturity date is the date at which the
principal and interest become due and payable. The maturity date is established in the initial note contract. For
example, when the previously mentioned customer requested the $2,000 loan on January 1, 2018, terms of
repayment included a maturity date of 24 months. This means that the loan will mature in two years, and the
principal and interest are due at that time. The following journal entries occur at the note’s established start
date. The first entry shows a note receivable in exchange for a product or service, and the second entry
illustrates the note from the point of view that a $2,000 loan was issued by a financial institution to a customer
(borrower).

608

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Before realization of the maturity date, the note is accumulating interest revenue for the lender. Interest is a
monetary incentive to the lender that justifies loan risk. An annual interest rate is established with the loan
terms. The interest rate is the part of a loan charged to the borrower, expressed as an annual percentage of
the outstanding loan amount. Interest is accrued daily, and this accumulation must be recorded periodically
(each month for example). The Revenue Recognition Principle requires that the interest revenue accrued is
recorded in the period when earned. Periodic interest accrued is recorded in Interest Revenue and Interest
Receivable. To calculate interest, the company can use the following formulas. The following example uses
months but the calculation could also be based on a 365-day year.

Another common way to state the interest formula is Interest = Principal × Rate × Time. From the previous
example, the company offered a $2,000 note with a maturity date of 24 months. The annual interest rate on
the loan is 10%. Each period the company needs to record an entry for accumulated interest during the period.
In this example, the first year’s interest revenue accumulation is computed as 10% × $2,000 × (12/12) = $200.
The $200 is recognized in Interest Revenue and Interest Receivable.

When interest is due at the end of the note (24 months), the company may record the collection of the loan
principal and the accumulated interest. These transactions can be recorded as one entry or two. The first set of
entries show collection of principal, followed by collection of the interest.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

609

Interest revenue from year one had already been recorded in 2018, but the interest revenue from 2019 is not
recorded until the end of the note term. Thus, Interest Revenue is increasing (credit) by $200, the remaining
revenue earned but not yet recognized. Interest Receivable decreasing (credit) reflects the 2018 interest owed
from the customer that is paid to the company at the end of 2019. The second possibility is one entry
recognizing principal and interest collection.

If the note term does not exceed one accounting period, the entry showing note collection may not reflect
interest receivable. For example, let’s say the company’s note maturity date was 12 months instead of 24
(payment in full occurs December 31, 2018). The entry to record collection of the principal and interest follows.

The examples provided account for collection of the note in full on the maturity date, which is considered an
honored note. But what if the customer does not pay within the specified contract length? This situation is
considered a dishonored note. A lender will still pursue collection of the note but will not maintain a long-term
receivable on its books. Instead, the lender will convert the notes receivable and interest due into an account
receivable. Sometimes a company will classify and label the uncollected account as a Dishonored Note
Receivable. Using our example, if the company was unable to collect the $2,000 from the customer at the
12-month maturity date, the following entry would occur.

610

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

If it is still unable to collect, the company may consider selling the receivable to a collection agency. When this
occurs, the collection agency pays the company a fraction of the note’s value, and the company would write
off any difference as a factoring (third-party debt collection) expense. Let’s say that our example company
turned over the $2,200 accounts receivable to a collection agency on March 5, 2019 and received only $500 for
its value. The difference between $2,200 and $500 of $1,700 is the factoring expense.

Notes receivable can convert to accounts receivable, as illustrated, but accounts receivable can also convert to
notes receivable. The transition from accounts receivable to notes receivable can occur when a customer
misses a payment on a short-term credit line for products or services. In this case, the company could extend
the payment period and require interest.
For example, a company may have an outstanding account receivable in the amount of $1,000. The customer
negotiates with the company on June 1 for a six-month note maturity date, 12% annual interest rate, and $250
cash up front. The company records the following entry at contract establishment.

This examines a note from the lender’s perspective; see Current Liabilities for an in-depth discussion on the
customer’s liability with a note (payable).

Illustrated Examples of Notes Receivable
To illustrate notes receivable scenarios, let’s return to Billie’s Watercraft Warehouse (BWW) as the example.
BWW has a customer, Waterways Corporation, that tends to have larger purchases that require an extended
payment period. On January 1, 2018, Waterways purchased merchandise in the amount of $250,000. BWW
agreed to lend the $250,000 purchase cost (sales price) to Waterways under the following conditions. First,
BWW agrees to accept a note payable issued by Waterways. The conditions of the note are that the principal
amount is $250,000, the maturity date on the note is 24 months, and the annual interest rate is 12%. On
January 1, 2018, BWW records the following entry.

Notes Receivable: Waterways increases (debit), and Sales Revenue increases (credit) for the principal amount

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

611

of $250,000. On December 31, 2018, BWW records interest accumulated on the note for 12 months.

Interest Receivable: Waterways increases (debit) as does Interest Revenue (credit) for 12 months of interest
computed as $250,000 × 12% × (12/12). On December 31, 2019, Waterways Corporation honors the note; BWW
records this collection as a single entry.

Cash increases (debit) for the principal and interest total of $310,000, Notes Receivable: Waterways decreases
(credit) for the principal amount of $250,000, Interest Receivable: Waterways decreases (credit) for the 2018
accumulated interest amount of $30,000, and Interest Revenue increases (credit) for the 2019 interest
collection amount of $30,000.
BWW does business with Sea Ferries Inc. BWW issued Sea Ferries a note in the amount of $100,000 on January
1, 2018, with a maturity date of six months, at a 10% annual interest rate. On July 2, BWW determined that Sea
Ferries dishonored its note and recorded the following entry to convert this debt into accounts receivable.

Accounts Receivable: Sea Ferries increases (debit) for the principal note amount plus interest, Notes
Receivable: Sea Ferries decreases (credit) for the principal amount due, and Interest Revenue increases (credit)
for interest earned at maturity. Interest is computed as $100,000 × 10% × (6/12). On September 1, 2018, BWW
determines that Sea Ferries’s account will be uncollectible and sells the balance to a collection agency for a
total of $35,000.

Cash increases (debit) for the agreed-upon discounted value of $35,000, Factoring Expense increases (debit)

612

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

for the outstanding amount and the discounted sales price, and Accounts Receivable: Sea Ferries decreases
(credit) for the original amount owed.
Alliance Cruises is a customer of BWW with an outstanding accounts receivable balance of $50,000. Alliance is
unable to pay in full on schedule, so it negotiates with BWW on March 1 to convert its accounts receivable into
a notes receivable. BWW agrees to the following terms: six-month note maturity date, 18% annual interest
rate, and $10,000 cash up front. BWW records the following entry at contract establishment.

Cash increases (debit) for the up-front collection of $10,000, Notes Receivable: Alliance increases (debit) for the
principal amount on the note of $40,000, and Accounts Receivable: Alliance decreases (credit) for the original
amount Alliance owed of $50,000.

LINK TO LEARNING
Another opportunity for a company to issue a notes receivable is when one business tries to acquire
another. As part of an acquisition sale between MMA Capital Management LLC and Hunt Companies Inc.,
MMA “provided financing for the purchase price in the form of a seven-year, note receivable from Hunt”
with an interest rate of 5%, payable in quarterly installments. Read this article on the terms of sale and
the role of the notes receivable in the MMA/Hunt Acquisition (https://openstax.org/l/50MMAHuntAcq) to
learn more.

9.7

Appendix: Comprehensive Example of Bad Debt Estimation

The following comprehensive example will illustrate the bad debt estimation process from the sales
transaction to adjusting entry reporting for all three bad debt estimation methods: income statement, balance
sheet, and balance sheet aging of receivables.
Furniture Direct sells office furniture to large scale businesses. Because the purchases are typically large,
Furniture Direct allows customers to pay on credit using an in-house account. At the end of the year, Furniture
Direct must estimate bad debt using one of the three estimation methods. It is currently using the income
statement method and estimates bad debt at 5% of credit sales. If it were to switch to the balance sheet
method, it would estimate bad debt at 8% of accounts receivable. If it were to use the balance sheet aging of
receivables method, it would split its receivables into three categories: 0–30 days past due at 5%, 31–90 days
past due at 10%, and over 90 days past due at 20%. There is currently a zero balance, transferred from the
prior year’s Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. The following information is available from the year-end income
statement and balance sheet.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

There is also additional information regarding the distribution of accounts receivable by age.

If the company were to maintain the income statement method, the total bad debt estimation would be
$67,500 ($1,350,000 × 5%), and the following adjusting entry would occur.

If the company were to use the balance sheet method, the total bad debt estimation would be $59,600
($745,000 × 8%), and the following adjusting entry would occur.

If the company were to use the balance sheet aging of receivables method, the total bad debt estimation
would be $58,250, calculated as shown:

The adjusting entry recorded using the aging method is as follows.

As you can see, the methods provide different financial figures.

613

614

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

While it is up to the company to determine which method best describes its financial position, as you see in
Account for Uncollectible Accounts Using the Balance Sheet and Income Statement Approaches, a company
may manage these methods and figures to present the best financial position possible.

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Grocery Store Offerings
Every week, millions of shoppers visit grocery stores. Consider the various transactions that are occurring
at any given time. Most of the items found within a grocery store are perishable and have a finite shelf
life. The majority of purchases are paid with cash, check, or credit card. Therefore, you might assume that
a grocery store would not have a balance in accounts receivable.
However, grocery stores have evolved to become a one-stop shop for many items. You can now purchase
gas, seasonal decorations, cooking utensils, and even fill your prescriptions at many stores.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

615

Key Terms
accounts receivable outstanding customer debt on a credit sale, typically receivable within a short time
period
accounts receivable turnover ratio how many times accounts receivable is collected during an operating
period and converted to cash
accrual accounting records transactions related to revenue earnings as they occur, not when cash is
collected
allowance for doubtful accounts contra asset account that is specifically contrary to accounts receivable; it
is used to estimate bad debt when the specific customer is unknown
allowance method estimates bad debt during a period based on certain computational approaches, and it
matches this to sales
bad debts uncollectible amounts from customer accounts
balance sheet aging of receivables method allowance method approach that estimates bad debt expenses
based on the balance in accounts receivable, but it also considers the uncollectible time period for each
account
balance sheet method (also, percentage of accounts receivable method) allowance method approach that
estimates bad debt expenses based on the balance in accounts receivable
completed contract method delays reporting of both revenues and expenses until the entire contract is
complete
contra account account paired with another account type that has an opposite normal balance to the paired
account; reduces or increases the balance in the paired account at the end of a period
direct write-off method delays recognition of bad debt until the specific customer accounts receivable is
identified
earnings management works within GAAP constraints to improve stakeholders’ views of the company’s
financial position
earnings manipulation ignores GAAP rules to alter earnings significantly to improve stakeholder’s views of
the company’s financial position
income statement method allowance method approach that estimates bad debt expenses based on the
assumption that at the end of the period, a certain percentage of sales during the period will not be
collected
installment sale periodic installment payments from buyers
interest monetary incentive to the lender, which justifies loan risk; interest is paid to the lender by the
borrower
interest rate part of a loan charged to the borrower, expressed as an annual percentage of the outstanding
loan amount
issue date point at which the security agreement is initially established
matching principle (also, expense recognition principle) records expenses related to revenue generation in
the period in which they are incurred
maturity date date a bond or note becomes due and payable
net realizable value amount of an account balance that is expected to be collected; for example, if a
company has a balance of $10,000 in accounts receivable and a $300 balance in the allowance for doubtful
accounts, the net realizable value is $9,700
note receivable formal legal contract between the buyer and the company, which requires a specific
payment amount at a predetermined future date, usually includes interest, and is payable beyond a

616

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

company’s operating cycle
number of days’ sales in receivables expected days it will take to convert accounts receivable into cash
percentage of completion method percentage of work completed for the period divided by the total
revenues from the contract
principal initial borrowed amount of a loan, not including interest; also, face value or maturity value of a
bond (the amount to be paid at maturity)
receivable outstanding amount owed from a customer
revenue recognition principle principle stating that company must recognize revenue in the period in
which it is earned; it is not considered earned until a product or service has been provided

Summary
9.1 Explain the Revenue Recognition Principle and How It Relates to Current and Future Sales and
Purchase Transactions
• According to the revenue recognition principle, a company will recognize revenue when a product or
service is provided to a client. The revenue must be reported in the period when the earnings process
completes.
• According to the matching principle, expenses must be matched with revenues in the period in which they
are incurred. A mismatch in revenues and expenses can lead to financial statement misreporting.
• When a customer pays for a product or service on a line of credit, the Accounts Receivable account is
used. Accounts receivable must satisfy the following criteria: the customer owes money and has yet to
pay, the amount is due in less than a company’s operating cycle, and the account usually does not incur
interest.
• When a customer purchases a product or service on credit, using an in-house account, Accounts
Receivable increases and Sales Revenue increases. When the customer pays the amount due, Accounts
Receivable decreases and Cash increases.
• When a customer purchases a product or service with a third-party credit card, such as Visa, Accounts
Receivable increases, Credit Card Expense increases, and Sales Revenue increases. When the credit card
company pays the amount due, Accounts Receivable decreases and Cash increases for the original sales
price less the credit card usage fee.
9.2 Account for Uncollectible Accounts Using the Balance Sheet and Income Statement Approaches
• Bad debt is a result of unpaid and uncollectible customer accounts. Companies are required to record bad
debt on financial statements as expenses.
• The direct write-off method records bad debt only when the due date has passed for a known amount.
Bad Debt Expense increases (debit) and Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) for the amount
uncollectible.
• The allowance method estimates uncollectible bad debt and matches the expense in the current period to
revenues generated. There are three ways to calculate this estimation: the income statement method,
balance sheet method/percentage of receivables, and balance sheet aging of receivables method.
• The income statement method estimates bad debt based on a percentage of credit sales. Bad Debt
Expense increases (debit) and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts increases (credit) for the amount
estimated as uncollectible.
• The balance sheet method estimates bad debt based on a percentage of outstanding accounts receivable.
Bad Debt Expense increases (debit) and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts increases (credit) for the
amount estimated as uncollectible.
• The balance sheet aging of receivables method estimates bad debt based on outstanding accounts

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

617

receivable, but it considers the time period that an account is past due. Bad Debt Expense increases
(debit) and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts increases (credit) for the amount estimated as uncollectible.
9.3 Determine the Efficiency of Receivables Management Using Financial Ratios
• Receivable ratios are best used to determine quick debt collection and lending practices. An investor,
lender, or management may use these ratios—in conjunction with financial statement review, past
performance, industry standards, and trends—to make an informed financial decision.
• The accounts receivable turnover ratio shows how many times receivables are collected during a period
and converted to cash. The ratio is found by taking net credit sales and dividing by average accounts
receivable for the period.
• The number of days’ sales in receivables ratio shows the expected number of days it will take to convert
accounts receivable into cash. The ratio is found by taking 365 days and dividing by the accounts
receivable turnover ratio.
9.4 Discuss the Role of Accounting for Receivables in Earnings Management
• Companies may look to report earnings differently to improve stakeholder’s views of financial position.
Earnings management works within GAAP to accomplish this, while earnings manipulation ignores GAAP.
• Companies may choose to manage earnings to improve income level, increase borrowing opportunities,
decrease tax liabilities, and improve company valuation for sales transactions. Accounts receivable is
often prey to earnings manipulations.
• Earnings management can occur in several ways, including changes to bad debt estimation methods,
percentage uncollectible figures, and category distribution within the balance sheet aging method.
• To understand company performance and unveil any management or manipulation to earnings, ratio
analysis is paramount. Number of days’ sales in receivables ratio, and trend analysis, are most commonly
used.
9.5 Apply Revenue Recognition Principles to Long-Term Projects
• Long-term construction projects may recognize revenue under the percentage of completion method or
the completed contract method. The percentage of completion method distributes cost and revenues
based on the amount of estimated contract completion during the period.
• Real estate installment sales require periodic payment from buyers. The installment method takes into
account risk and distributes revenue based on a percentage of gross profit realized each period.
• With multi-year magazine subscriptions, customers pay in advance for subscription services, and the
amount reported for revenue each period is reasonably estimated, until any disruption to the contract
occurs. At that time, a new estimation will be distributed over the life of the subscription.
• In a combined equipment purchase with accompanying service contract, the customer pays for the
contract up front, but there is no guarantee that service will be provided. Thus, a company may distribute
estimated service revenues over the life of the contract or defer recognition and associated expenses until
the contract period is complete.
9.6 Explain How Notes Receivable and Accounts Receivable Differ
• Accounts receivable is an informal agreement between customer and company, with collection occurring
in less than a year, and no interest requirement. In contrast, notes receivable is a legal contract, with
collection occurring typically over a year, and interest requirements.
• The terms of a note contract establish the principal collection amount, maturity date, and annual interest
rate.
• Interest is computed as the principal amount multiplied by the part of the year, multiplied by the annual
interest rate. The entry to record accumulated interest increases interest receivable and interest revenue.

618

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

• An honored note means collection occurred on time and in full. Recording an honored note includes an
increase to cash and interest revenue, and a decrease to interest receivable and notes receivable.
• A dishonored note means collection did not occur on time or in full. In this case, a note and the
accumulated interest would be converted to accounts receivable.
• When a company cannot collect on account, the company may consider selling the receivable to a
collection agency. They will sell the receivable at a fraction of the value in order to apply resources
elsewhere.
• If a customer cannot pay its accounts receivable on time, it may renegotiate terms that include a note and
interest, thereby converting the accounts receivable to notes receivable. in this case, accounts receivable
decreases, and notes receivable and cash increase.

Multiple Choice
1.

9.1 Which of the following is not a criterion to recognize revenue under GAAP?
A.

The earnings process must be completed.

B.

A product or service must be provided.

C.

Cash must be collected.

D.

GAAP requires that the accrual basis accounting principle be used in the revenue recognition process.

2.

9.1 Which of the following best represents the matching principle criteria?
A.

Expenses are reported in the period in which they were incurred.

B.

Expenses may be reported in a different period than the matching revenues.

C.

Revenue and expenses are matched based on when expenses are paid.

D.

Revenue is recognized when an order occurs and not when the actual sale is initiated.

3.

9.1 If a customer pays with a credit card and the service has been provided, which of the following

accounts will be used to record the sales entry for this transaction?
A.

Cost of Goods Sold, Merchandise Inventory, Sales Revenue

B.

Sales Revenue, Credit Card Expense, Accounts Receivable

C.

Accounts Receivable, Merchandise Inventory, Credit Card Expense

D.

Cost of Goods Sold, Credit Card Expense, Sales Revenue

4.

9.1 A car dealership sells a car to a customer for $35,000. The customer makes a 10% down payment, and

the dealership finances the remaining 90% in-house. How much will the car dealership record in Accounts
Receivable for this customer?
A.

$31,500

B.

$19,250

C.

$8,750

D.

$7,000

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

5.

619

9.2 Tines Commerce computes bad debt based on the allowance method. They determine their current

year’s balance estimation to be a credit of $45,000. The previous period had a credit balance in Allowance for
Doubtful Accounts of $12,000. What should be the reported figure in the adjusting entry for the current
period?
A.

$12,000

B.

$45,000

C.

$33,000

D.

$57,000

6.

9.2 Doer Company reports year-end credit sales in the amount of $390,000 and accounts receivable of

$85,500. Doer uses the income statement method to report bad debt estimation. The estimation percentage is
3.5%. What is the estimated balance uncollectible using the income statement method?
A.

$13,650

B.

$2,992.50

C.

$136,500

D.

$29,925

7.

9.2 Balloons Plus computes bad debt based on the allowance method. They determine their current

year’s balance estimation to be a credit of $84,000. The previous period had a credit balance in Allowance for
Doubtful Accounts of $26,000. What should be the reported figure in the adjusting entry for the current
period?
A.

$84,000

B.

$58,000

C.

$26,000

D.

$110,000

8.

9.2 Conner Pride reports year-end credit sales in the amount of $567,000 and accounts receivable of

$134,000. Conner uses the balance sheet method to report bad debt estimation. The estimation percentage is
4.6%. What is the estimated balance uncollectible using the balance sheet method?
A.

$26,082

B.

$6,164

C.

$260,820

D.

$61,640

9.

9.2 Which method delays recognition of bad debt until the specific customer accounts receivable is

identified?
A.

income statement method

B.

balance sheet method

C.

direct write-off method

D.

allowance method

10.

9.2 Which of the following estimation methods considers the amount of time past due when computing

bad debt?
A.

balance sheet method

B.

direct write-off method

C.

income statement method

D.

balance sheet aging of receivables method

620

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

11.

9.3 Which of the following best represents a positive product of a lower number of days’ sales in

receivables ratio?
A.

collection of receivables is quick, and cash can be used for other business expenditures

B.

collection of receivables is slow, keeping cash secured to receivables

C.

credit extension is lenient

D.

the lender only lends to the top 10% of potential creditors

12.

9.3 South Rims has an accounts receivable balance at the end of 2018 of $357,470. The net credit sales

for the year are $769,346. The balance at the end of 2017 was $325,300. What is the accounts receivable
turnover rate for 2018 (rounded to two decimal places)?
A.

2.02 times

B.

2.25 times

C.

2.15 times

D.

1.13 times

13.

9.3 What information can best be elicited from a receivable ratio?
A.

company performance with current debt collection

B.

credit extension effect on cash sales

C.

likelihood of future customer bankruptcy filings

D.

an increase in future credit sales to current customers

14.

9.3 Ancient Grains Unlimited has an accounts receivable turnover ratio of 3.34 times. The net credit

sales for the year are $567,920. What is the days’ sales in receivables ratio for 2018 (rounded to the nearest
whole number)?
A.

190 days

B.

109 days

C.

110 days

D.

101 days

15.

9.4 Which of the following is not a way to manage earnings?
A.

Change the method for bad debt estimation.

B.

Change the figure for the uncollectible percentage.

C.

Under the balance sheet aging method, change the past-due categories.

D.

Change the dates of common stock issuance.

16.

9.4 Which of the following is true about earnings management?
A.

It works within the constraints of GAAP.

B.

It works outside the constraints of GAAP.

C.

It tries to improve stakeholder’s views of the company’s financial position.

D.

Both B and C

E.

Both A and C

17.

9.4 Which statement is most directly affected by a change to net income?
A.

balance sheet

B.

income statement

C.

statement of retained earnings

D.

statement of cash flows

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

18.

621

9.4 Michelle Company reports $345,000 in credit sales and $267,500 in accounts receivable at the end of

2019. Michelle currently uses the income statement method to record bad debt estimation at 4%. To manage
earnings more efficiently, Michelle changes bed debt estimation to the balance sheet method at 4%. How
much is the difference in net income between the income statement and balance sheet methods?
A.

$3,100

B.

$13,800

C.

$10,700

D.

$77,500

19.

9.6 Which of the following is true of a maturity date?
A.

It must be calculated in days, not in months or years.

B.

It is the date when principal and interest on a note are to be repaid to the lender.

C.

It is the date of establishment of note terms between a lender and customer.

D.

It is not a characteristic of a note receivable.

20.

9.6 Mark Industries issues a note in the amount of $45,000 on August 1, 2018 in exchange for the sale of

merchandise. Which of the following is the correct journal entry for this sale?
A.

B.

C.

D.

21.

9.6 A customer takes out a loan of $130,000 on January 1, with a maturity date of 36 months, and an

annual interest rate of 11%. If 6 months have passed since note establishment, what would be the recorded
interest figure at that time?
A.

$7,150

B.

$65,000

C.

$14,300

D.

$2,383

22.

9.6 A company collects an honored note with a maturity date of 24 months from establishment, a 10%

interest rate, and an initial loan amount of $30,000. Which accounts are used to record collection of the
honored note at maturity date?
A.

Interest Revenue, Interest Expense, Cash

B.

Interest Receivable, Cash, Notes Receivable

C.

Interest Revenue, Interest Receivable, Cash, Notes Receivable

D.

Notes Receivable, Interest Revenue, Cash, Interest Expense

622

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

23.

9.6 Orion Rentals is unable to collect on a note worth $25,000 and has accumulated interest of $250. It

convert this note and interest to accounts receivable. After some time, Orion is still unable to collect the debt
and it decides to sell the converted note to a collection agency. The collection agency will pay only 20% of the
value of accounts receivable to Orion. What is the amount of cash paid to Orion from the collection agency?
A.

$5,000

B.

$5,050

C.

$20,000

D.

$19,950

Questions
1.

9.1 What is the matching principle?

2.

9.1 A beverage wholesale outlet sells beverages by the case. On April 13, a customer purchased 18 cases

of wine at $42 per case, 20 cases of soda at $29 per case, and 45 cases of water at $17 per case. The customer
pays with a Merill credit card. Merill charges a usage fee to the company of 5% of the total sale. What is the
sales entry for this purchase?
3.

9.1 On January 1, a flower shop contracts with customers to provide flowers for their wedding on June 2.

The total contract price is $3,000, payable in equal installments for the next six months on the first of each
month (with the first payment due January 1). How much will be recorded as revenue during the month of
April?
4.

9.1 American Signs allows customers to pay with their Jones credit card and cash. Jones charges

American Signs a 3.5% service fee for each credit sale using its card. Credit sales for the month of June total
$328,430, where 40% of those sales were made using the Jones credit card. Based on this information, what
will be the total in Credit Card Expense at the end of June?
5.

9.2 Which account type is used to record bad debt estimation and is a contra account to Accounts

Receivable?
6.

9.2 Earrings Depot records bad debt using the allowance, balance sheet method. They recorded $97,440

in accounts receivable for the year and $288,550 in credit sales. The uncollectible percentage is 5.5%. What is
the bad debt estimation for the year using the balance sheet method?
7.

9.2 Racing Adventures records bad debt using the allowance, income statement method. They recorded

$134,560 in accounts receivable for the year and $323,660 in credit sales. The uncollectible percentage is 6.8%.
What is the bad debt estimation for the year using the income statement method?
8.

9.2 Aron Larson is a customer of Bank Enterprises. Mr. Larson took out a loan in the amount of $120,000

on August 1. On December 31, Bank Enterprises determines the loan to be uncollectible. Larson had not paid
anything toward the balance due on account. What is the journal entry recording the bad debt write-off?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

9.

623

9.2 The following accounts receivable information pertains to Growth Markets LLC.

What is the total uncollectible estimated bad debt for Growth Markets LLC?
10.

9.2 What are bad debts?

11.

9.3 What are some possible negative signals when the product of the accounts receivable turnover ratio

is lower (i.e., fewer times)?
12.

9.3 Berry Farms has an accounts receivable balance at the end of 2018 of $425,650. The net credit sales

for the year are $924,123. The balance at the end of 2017 was $378,550. What is the number of days’ sales in
receivables ratio for 2018 (round all answers to two decimal places)?
13.

9.3 What are the two most common receivables ratios, and what do these ratios tell a stakeholder about

the company?
14.

9.4 What is the difference between earnings management and earnings manipulation?

15.

9.4 What is an earnings management benefit from showing a reduced figure for bad debt expense?

16.

9.4 Angelo’s Outlet used to report bad debt using the balance sheet method and is now switching to

the income statement method. The percentage uncollectible will remain constant at 5%. Credit sales figures
for 2019 were $866,000, and accounts receivable was $732,000. How much will Angelo’s Outlet report for 2019
bad debt estimation under the income statement method?
17.

9.4 What is an earnings management benefit from showing an increased figure for bad debt expense?

18.

9.5 What are the two methods of revenue recognition for long-term construction projects?

19.

9.5 What is the installment method?

20.

9.5 What is a possible ramification of deferred revenue reporting?

21.

9.5 What is the completed contract method?

22.

9.5 What is the percentage of completion method?

23.

9.6 British Imports is unable to collect on a note worth $215,000 that has accumulated interest of $465.

What is the journal entry to record the conversion of the note to accounts receivable?
24.

9.6 Chemical Enterprises issues a note in the amount of $156,000 to a customer on January 1, 2018.

Terms of the note show a maturity date of 36 months, and an annual interest rate of 8%. What is the
accumulated interest entry if 9 months have passed since note establishment?
25.

9.6 What is the principal of a note?

26.

9.6 A customer was unable to pay the accounts receivable on time in the amount of $34,000. The

customer was able to negotiate with the company and transferred the accounts receivable into a note that
includes interest, along with an up-front cash payment of $6,000. The note maturity date is 24 months with a
15% annual interest rate. What is the entry to recognize this transfer?
27.

9.6 What are three differences between accounts receivable and notes receivable?

624

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Exercise Set A
EA1.

9.1 Prepare journal entries for the following transactions from Restaurant Depot.

Nov. 8

Customer Miles Shandy purchased 200 pans at $35 per pan, costing Restaurant Depot $21 per
pan. Terms of the sale are 2/10, n/30, invoice dated November 8.

Nov. 17
EA2.

Miles Shandy pays in full with cash for his purchase of November 8.

9.1 Prepare journal entries for the following transactions from Cars Plus.

Oct. 18

Customer Angela Sosa purchased $132,980 worth of car parts with her Standard credit card. The
cost to Cars Plus for the sale is $86,250. Standard credit card charges Cars Plus a fee of 4% of the
sale.

Oct. 24
EA3.

Standard remits payment to Cars Plus, less any fees.

9.1 Consider the following transaction: On March 6, Fun Cards sells 540 card decks with a sales price of

$7 per deck to Padma Singh. The cost to Fun Cards is $4 per deck. Prepare a journal entry under each of the
following conditions. Assume MoneyPlus charges a 2% fee for each sales transaction using its card.
A.

Payment is made using a credit, in-house account.

B.

Payment is made using a MoneyPlus credit card.

EA4.

9.2 Window World extended credit to customer Nile Jenkins in the amount of $130,900 for his

purchase of window treatments on April 2. Terms of the sale are 2/60, n/150. The cost of the purchase to
Window World is $56,200. On September 4, Window World determined that Nile Jenkins’s account was
uncollectible and wrote off the debt. On December 3, Mr. Jenkins unexpectedly paid in full on his account.
Record each Window World transaction with Nile Jenkins. In order to demonstrate the write-off and then
subsequent collection of an account receivable, assume in this example that Window World rarely extends
credit directly, so this transaction is permitted to use the direct write-off method. Remember, however, that in
most cases the direct write-off method is not allowed.
EA5.

9.2 Millennium Associates records bad debt using the allowance, income statement method. They

recorded $299,420 in accounts receivable for the year, and $773,270 in credit sales. The uncollectible
percentage is 3.2%. On February 5, Millennium Associates identifies one uncollectible account from Molar Corp
in the amount of $1,330. On April 15, Molar Corp unexpectedly pays its account in full. Record journal entries
for the following.
A.

Year-end adjusting entry for 2017 bad debt

B.

February 5, 2018 identification entry

C.

Entry for payment on April 15, 2018

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

EA6.

625

9.2 Millennium Associates records bad debt using the allowance, balance sheet method. They

recorded $299,420 in accounts receivable for the year, and $773,270 in credit sales. The uncollectible
percentage is 3.2%. On November 22, Millennium Associates identifies one uncollectible account from Angel’s
Hardware in the amount of $3,650. On December 18, Angel’s Hardware unexpectedly pays its account in full.
Record journal entries for the following.
A.

Year-end adjusting entry for 2017 bad debt

B.

November 22, 2018 identification entry

C.

Entry for payment on December 18, 2018

EA7.

9.2 The following accounts receivable information pertains to Marshall Inc.

Determine the estimated uncollectible bad debt from Marshall Inc. using the balance sheet aging of
receivables method, and record the year-end adjusting journal entry for bad debt.
EA8.

9.3 Using the following select financial statement information from Black Water Industries, compute

the accounts receivable turnover ratios for 2018 and 2019 (round answers to two decimal places). What do the
outcomes tell a potential investor about Black Water Industries?

EA9.

9.3 Using the following select financial statement information from Black Water Industries, compute

the number of days’ sales in receivables ratios for 2018 and 2019 (round answers to two decimal places). What
do the outcomes tell a potential investor about Black Water Industries?

EA10.

9.3 Millennial Manufacturing has net credit sales for 2018 in the amount of $1,433,630, beginning

accounts receivable balance of $585,900, and an ending accounts receivable balance of $621,450. Compute the
accounts receivable turnover ratio and the number of days’ sales in receivables ratio for 2018 (round answers
to two decimal places). What do the outcomes tell a potential investor about Millennial Manufacturing if
industry average is 2.6 times and number of day’s sales ratio is 180 days?

626

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

EA11.

9.4 Mirror Mart uses the balance sheet aging method to account for uncollectible debt on

receivables. The following is the past-due category information for outstanding receivable debt for 2019.

To manage earnings more efficiently, Mirror Mart decided to change past-due categories as follows.

Complete the following.
A.

Complete each table by filling in the blanks.

B.

Determine the difference between total uncollectible.

C.

Explain how the new total uncollectible amount affects net income and accounts receivable.

EA12.

9.4 Aerospace Electronics reports $567,000 in credit sales for 2018 and $632,500 in 2019. They have a

$499,000 accounts receivable balance at the end of 2018, and $600,000 at the end of 2019. Aerospace uses the
income statement method to record bad debt estimation at 5% during 2018. To manage earnings more
favorably, Aerospace changes bad debt estimation to the balance sheet method at 7% during 2019.
A.

Determine the bad debt estimation for 2018.

B.

Determine the bad debt estimation for 2019.

C.

Describe a benefit to Aerospace Electronics in 2019 as a result of its earnings management.

EA13.

9.4 Dortmund Stockyard reports $896,000 in credit sales for 2018 and $802,670 in 2019. It has a

$675,000 accounts receivable balance at the end of 2018, and $682,000 at the end of 2019. Dortmund uses the
balance sheet method to record bad debt estimation at 8% during 2018. To manage earnings more favorably,
Dortmund changes bad debt estimation to the income statement method at 6% during 2019.
A.

Determine the bad debt estimation for 2018.

B.

Determine the bad debt estimation for 2019.

C.

Describe a benefit to Dortmund Stockyard in 2019 as a result of its earnings management.

EA14.

9.6 Arvan Patel is a customer of Bank’s Hardware Store. For Mr. Patel’s latest purchase on January 1,

2018, Bank’s Hardware issues a note with a principal amount of $480,000, 13% annual interest rate, and a
24-month maturity date on December 31, 2019. Record the journal entries for Bank’s Hardware Store for the
following transactions.
A.

Note issuance

B.

Subsequent interest entry on December 31, 2018

C.

Honored note entry at maturity on December 31, 2019.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

EA15.

627

9.6 Resin Milling issued a $390,500 note on January 1, 2018 to a customer in exchange for

merchandise. The merchandise had a cost to Resin Milling of $170,000. The terms of the note are 24-month
maturity date on December 31, 2019 at a 5% annual interest rate. The customer does not pay on its account
and dishonors the note. Record the journal entries for Resin Milling for the following transactions.
A.

Initial sale on January 1, 2018

B.

Dishonored note entry on January 1, 2020, assuming interest has not been recognized before note
maturity

EA16.

9.6 Mystic Magic issued a $120,250 note on January 1, 2018 to a customer, Amy Arnold, in exchange

for merchandise. Terms of the note are 9-month maturity date on October 1, 2018 at a 9.6% annual interest
rate. Amy Arnold does not pay on her account and dishonors the note. On November 10, 2018, Mystic Magic
decides to sell the dishonored note to a collection agency for 25% of its value. Record the journal entries for
Mystic Magic for the following transactions.
A.

Initial sale on January 1, 2018

B.

Dishonored note entry on October 1, 2018

C.

Receivable sale on November 10, 2018

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

9.1 Prepare journal entries for the following transactions from Movie Mart.

Sept. 10

Customer Ellie Monk purchased $43,820 worth of merchandise from Movie Mart, costing Movie
Mart $28,745. Terms of the sale are 3/10, n/60, invoice dated September 10.

Sept. 22
EB2.

Ellie Monk pays in full with cash for her purchase on September 22.

9.1 Prepare journal entries for the following transactions from Angled Pictures.

June 21

Customer LeShaun Rogers purchased 167 picture frames at a sales price of $28 per frame with
her American credit card. The cost to Angled Pictures for the sale is $19 per frame. American
credit card charges Angled Pictures a fee of 3% of the sale.

June 30
EB3.

American remits payment to Angled Pictures, less any fees.

9.1 Consider the following transaction: On February 15, Darling Dolls sells 110 dolls with a sales price

of $15 per doll to Rosemary Cummings The cost to Darling Dolls is $5 per doll. Prepare a journal entry under
each of the following conditions. Assume Gentry charges a 3.5% fee for each sales transaction using its card.
A.

Payment is made using a credit, in-house account.

B.

Payment is made using a Gentry credit card.

628

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

EB4.

9.2 Laminate Express extended credit to customer Amal Sunderland in the amount of $244,650 for his

January 4 purchase of flooring. Terms of the sale are 2/30, n/120. The cost of the purchase to Laminate Express
is $88,440. On April 5, Laminate Express determined that Amal Sunderland’s account was uncollectible and
wrote off the debt. On June 22, Amal Sunderland unexpectedly paid 30% of the total amount due in cash on his
account. Record each Laminate Express transaction with Amal Sunderland. In order to demonstrate the writeoff and then subsequent collection of an account receivable, assume in this example that Laminate Express
rarely extends credit directly, so this transaction is permitted to use the direct write-off method. Remember,
though, that in most cases the direct write-off method is not allowed.
EB5.

9.2 Olena Mirrors records bad debt using the allowance, income statement method. They recorded

$343,160 in accounts receivable for the year and $577,930 in credit sales. The uncollectible percentage is 4.4%.
On May 10, Olena Mirrors identifies one uncollectible account from Elsa Sweeney in the amount of $2,870. On
August 12, Elsa Sweeney unexpectedly pays $1,441 toward her account. Record journal entries for the
following.
A.

Year-end adjusting entry for 2017 bad debt

B.

May 10, 2018 identification entry

C.

Entry for payment on August 12, 2018

EB6.

9.2 Olena Mirrors records bad debt using the allowance, balance sheet method. They recorded

$343,160 in accounts receivable for the year and $577,930 in credit sales. The uncollectible percentage is 4.4%.
On June 11, Olena Mirrors identifies one uncollectible account from Nadia White in the amount of $4,265. On
September 14, Nadia Chernoff unexpectedly pays $1,732 toward her account. Record journal entries for the
following.
A.

Year-end adjusting entry for 2017 bad debt

B.

June 11, 2018 identification entry

C.

Entry for payment on September 14, 2018

EB7.

9.2 The following accounts receivable information pertains to Envelope Experts.

Determine the estimated uncollectible bad debt from Envelope Experts using the balance sheet aging of
receivables method, and record the year-end adjusting journal entry for bad debt.
EB8.

9.3 Using the following select financial statement information from Mover Supply Depot, compute the

accounts receivable turnover ratios for 2018 and 2019 (round answers to two decimal places). What do the
outcomes tell a potential investor about Mover Supply Depot if the industry average is 4 times?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

EB9.

629

9.3 Using the following select financial statement information from Mover Supply Depot, compute the

number of days’ sales in receivables ratios for 2018 and 2019 (round answers to two decimal places). What do
the outcomes tell a potential investor about Mover Supply Depot if the competition collects in approximately
65 days?

EB10.

9.3 Starlight Enterprises has net credit sales for 2019 in the amount of $2,600,325, beginning

accounts receivable balance of $844,260, and an ending accounts receivable balance of $604,930. Compute the
accounts receivable turnover ratio and the number of days’ sales in receivables ratio for 2019 (round answers
to two decimal places). What do the outcomes tell a potential investor about Starlight Enterprises if the
industry average is 1.5 times and the number of days’ sales ratio is 175 days?
EB11.

9.4 Outpost Designs uses the balance sheet aging method to account for uncollectible debt on

receivables. The following is the past-due category information for outstanding receivable debt for 2019.

To manage earnings more favorably, Outpost Designs decided to change past-due categories as follows.

Complete the following.
A.

Complete each table by filling in the blanks.

B.

Determine the difference between total uncollectible.

C.

Explain how the new total uncollectible amount affects net income and accounts receivable.

EB12.

9.4 Clovis Enterprises reports $845,500 in credit sales for 2018 and $933,000 in 2019. It has a $758,000

accounts receivable balance at the end of 2018 and $841,000 at the end of 2019. Clovis uses the income
statement method to record bad debt estimation at 4% during 2018. To manage earnings more favorably,
Clovis changes bad debt estimation to the balance sheet method at 5% during 2019.
A.

Determine the bad debt estimation for 2018.

B.

Determine the bad debt estimation for 2019.

C.

Describe a benefit to Clovis Enterprises in 2019 as a result of its earnings management.

630

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

EB13.

9.4 Fortune Accounting reports $1,455,000 in credit sales for 2018 and $1,678,430 in 2019. It has an

$825,000 accounts receivable balance at the end of 2018 and $756,000 at the end of 2019. Fortune uses the
balance sheet method to record bad debt estimation at 7.5% during 2018. To manage earnings more
favorably, Fortune changes bad debt estimation to the income statement method at 5.5% during 2019.
A.

Determine the bad debt estimation for 2018.

B.

Determine the bad debt estimation for 2019.

C.

Describe a benefit to Fortune in 2019 as a result of its earnings management.

EB14.

9.6 Anderson Air is a customer of Handler Cleaning Operations. For Anderson Air’s latest purchase

on January 1, 2018, Handler Cleaning Operations issues a note with a principal amount of $1,255,000, 6%
annual interest rate, and a 24-month maturity date on December 31, 2019. Record the journal entries for
Handler Cleaning Operations for the following transactions.
A.

Entry for note issuance

B.

Subsequent interest entry on December 31, 2018

C.

Honored note entry at maturity on December 31, 2019

EB15.

9.6 Rain T-Shirts issued a $440,600 note on January 1, 2018 to a customer, Larry Potts, in exchange for

merchandise. The merchandise had a cost to Rain T-Shirts of $220,300. The terms of the note are 24-month
maturity date on December 31, 2019 at a 4.5% annual interest rate. Larry Potts does not pay on his account
and dishonors the note. Record journal entries for Rain T-Shirts for the following transactions.
A.

Initial sale on January 1, 2018

B.

Dishonored note entry on January 1, 2020, assuming interest has not been recognized before note
maturity

EB16.

9.6 Element Surfboards issued a $210,800 note on January 1, 2018 to a customer, Leona Marland, in

exchange for merchandise. Terms of the note are 9-month maturity date on October 1, 2018 at a 10.2% annual
interest rate. Leona Marland does not pay on her account and dishonors the note. On December 2, 2018,
Element Surfboards decides to sell the dishonored note to a collection agency for 30% of its value. Record the
journal entries for Element Surfboards for the following transactions.
A.

Initial sale on January 1, 2018

B.

Dishonored note entry on October 1, 2018

C.

Receivable sale on December 2, 2018

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

631

Problem Set A
PA1.

9.1 Prepare journal entries for the following transactions from Barrels Warehouse.

Jul. 1

Sold 2,000 barrels with a sales price of $30 per barrel to customer Luck’s Vineyards. Luck’s
Vineyards paid with cash. The cost for this sale is $18 per barrel.

Jul. 3

Sold 1,200 barrels with a sales price of $32 per barrel to customer Paramount Apparel. Paramount
paid using its in-house credit account. Terms of the sale are 3/10, n/30. The cost for this sale is
$17 per barrel.

Jul. 5

Sold 1,400 barrels with a sales price of $31 per barrel to customer Melody Sharehouse. Melody
paid using her MoneyPlus credit card. The cost for this sale is $18 per barrel. MoneyPlus Credit
Card Company charges Barrels Warehouse a 2% usage fee based on the total sale per
transaction.

Jul. 8

MoneyPlus Credit Card Company made a cash payment in full to Barrels Warehouse for the
transaction from July 5, less any usage fees.

Jul. 13
PA2.

Paramount Apparel paid its account in full with a cash payment, less any discounts.
9.1 Prepare journal entries for the following transactions of Dulce Delights.

Apr. 10

Sold 320 ice cream buckets with a sales price of $12 per bucket to customer Livia Diaz. Livia paid
using her in-house credit account; terms 2/10, n/30. The cost for this sale to Dulce Delights is
$4.50 per bucket.

Apr. 13

Sold 290 ice cream buckets with a sales price of $12.50 per bucket to customer Selene Arnold.
Selene paid using her Max credit card. The cost for this sale to Dulce Delights is $4.50 per bucket.
Max Credit Card Company charges Dulce Delights a 5% usage fee based on the total sale per
transaction.

Apr. 20

Livia Diaz paid her account in full with a cash payment, less any discounts.

Apr. 25

Max Credit Card Company made a cash payment in full to Dulce Delights for the transaction
from April 13, less any usage fees.

632

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PA3.

9.1 Prepare journal entries for the following transactions from Forest Furniture.

Oct. 3

Sold 2 couches with a sales price of $2,450 per couch to customer Norman Guzman. Norman
Guzman paid with his Draw Plus credit card. The Draw Plus credit card charges Forest Furniture a
3.5% usage fee based on the total sale per transaction. The cost for this sale is $1,700 per couch.

Oct. 6

Sold 4 end chairs for a total sales price of $1,250 to April Orozco. April paid in full with cash. The
cost of the sale is $800.

Oct. 9

Sold 18 can lights with a sales price of $50 per light to customer James Montgomery. James
Montgomery paid using his Fund Max credit card. Fund Max charges Forest Furniture a 2.4%
usage fee based on the total sale per transaction. The cost for this sale is $29 per light.

Oct. 12

Draw Plus made a cash payment in full to Forest Furniture for the transaction from Oct 3, less
any usage fees.

Oct. 15

Fund Max made a cash payment of 25% of the total due to Forest Furniture for the transaction
from October 9th, less any usage fees.

Oct. 25

Fund Max made a cash payment of the remainder due to Forest Furniture for the transaction
from October 9, less any usage fees.

PA4.

9.2 Jars Plus recorded $861,430 in credit sales for the year and $488,000 in accounts receivable. The

uncollectible percentage is 2.3% for the income statement method, and 3.6% for the balance sheet method.
A.

Record the year-end adjusting entry for 2018 bad debt using the income statement method.

B.

Record the year-end adjusting entry for 2018 bad debt using the balance sheet method.

C.

Assume there was a previous debit balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $10,220, record the
year-end entry for bad debt using the income statement method, and then the entry using the balance
sheet method.

D.

Assume there was a previous credit balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $5,470, record the
year-end entry for bad debt using the income statement method, and then the entry using the balance
sheet method.

PA5.

A.

9.2 The following accounts receivable information pertains to Luxury Cruises.

Determine the estimated uncollectible bad debt for Luxury Cruises in 2018 using the balance sheet
aging of receivables method.

B.

Record the year-end 2018 adjusting journal entry for bad debt.

C.

Assume there was a previous debit balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $187,450; record the
year-end entry for bad debt, taking this into consideration.

D.

Assume there was a previous credit balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $206,770; record the
year-end entry for bad debt, taking this into consideration.

E.

On January 24, 2019, Luxury Cruises identifies Landon Walker’s account as uncollectible in the amount
of $4,650. Record the entry for identification.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PA6.

633

9.2 Funnel Direct recorded $1,345,780 in credit sales for the year and $695,455 in accounts receivable.

The uncollectible percentage is 4.4% for the income statement method and 4% for the balance sheet method.
A.

Record the year-end adjusting entry for 2018 bad debt using the income statement method.

B.

Record the year-end adjusting entry for 2018 bad debt using the balance sheet method.

C.

Assume there was a previous credit balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $13,888; record the
year-end entry for bad debt using the income statement method, and then the entry using the balance
sheet method.

PA7.

9.3 Review the select information for Bean Superstore and Legumes Plus (industry competitors), and

then complete the following.
A.

Compute the accounts receivable turnover ratios for each company for 2018 and 2019.

B.

Compute the number of days’ sales in receivables ratios for each company for 2018 and 2019.

C.

Determine which company is the better investment and why. Round answers to two decimal places.

634

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PA8.

9.3 The following select financial statement information from Candid Photography.

Compute the accounts receivable turnover ratios and the number of days’ sales in receivables ratios for 2018
and 2019 (round answers to two decimal places). What do the outcomes tell a potential investor about Candid
Photography if industry average for accounts receivable turnover ratio is 3 times and days’ sales in receivables
ratio is 150 days?
PA9.

9.4 Noren Company uses the balance sheet aging method to account for uncollectible debt on

receivables. The following is the past-due category information for outstanding receivable debt for 2019.

To manage earnings more favorably, Noren Company considers changing the past-due categories as follows.

A.

Complete each table by filling in the blanks.

B.

Determine the difference between totals uncollectible.

C.

Complete the following 2019 comparative income statements for 2019, showing net income changes as
a result of the changes to the balance sheet aging method categories.

D.

Describe the categories change effect on net income and accounts receivable.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PA10.

635

9.4 Elegant Universal uses the balance sheet aging method to account for uncollectible debt on

receivables. The following is the past-due category information for outstanding receivable debt for 2019.

To manage earnings more favorably, Elegant Universal considers changing the past-due categories as follows.

A.

Complete each table by filling in the blanks.

B.

Determine the difference between totals uncollectible.

C.

Describe the categories change effect on net income and accounts receivable.

PA11.

9.6 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Telesco Enterprises.

Jan. 1, 2018

Issued a $330,700 note to customer Abe Willis as terms of a merchandise sale. The
merchandise’s cost to Telesco is $120,900. Note contract terms included a 36-month
maturity date, and a 4% annual interest rate.

Dec. 31, 2018

Telesco records interest accumulated for 2018.

Dec. 31, 2019

Telesco records interest accumulated for 2019.

Dec. 31, 2020

Abe Willis honors the note and pays in full with cash.

PA12.

9.6 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Wind Solutions.

Jan. 1, 2018

Issued a $2,350,100 note to customer Solar Plex as terms of a merchandise sale. The
merchandise’s cost to Wind Solutions is $1,002,650. Note contract terms included a
24-month maturity date, and a 2.1% annual interest rate.

Dec. 31, 2018

Wind Solutions records interest accumulated for 2018.

Dec. 31, 2019

Wind Solutions converts Solar Plex’s dishonored note into account receivable. This
includes accumulated interest for the 24-month period.

Mar. 8, 2020

Wind Solutions sells the outstanding debt from Solar Plex to a collection agency at 25% of
the accounts receivable value.

636

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PA13.

9.6 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Commissary Productions.

Jan. 1, 2018

Issued a $425,530 note to customer June Solkowski as terms of a merchandise sale. The
merchandise’s cost to Commissary is $231,700. Note contract terms included a 36-month
maturity date, and a 5% annual interest rate.

Dec. 31, 2018

Commissary records interest accumulated for 2018.

Dec. 31, 2019

Commissary records interest accumulated for 2019.

Dec. 31, 2020

June Stevens honors the note and pays in full with cash.

PA14.

9.6 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Piano Wholesalers.

Jan. 1, 2018

Issued a $1,235,650 note to customer Arrowstar as terms of a merchandise sale. The
merchandise’s cost to Piano Wholesalers is $602,000. Note contract terms included a
24-month maturity date and a 3.4% annual interest rate.

Dec. 31, 2018

Piano Wholesalers records interest accumulated for 2018.

Dec. 31, 2019

Piano Wholesalers converts Arrowstar’s dishonored note into account receivable. This
includes accumulated interest for the 24-month period.

Apr. 12, 2020

Piano Wholesalers sells the outstanding debt from Arrowstar to a collection agency at 32%
of the accounts receivable value.

PA15.

9.7 Organics Plus is considering which bad debt estimation method works best for its company. It is

deciding between the income statement method, balance sheet method of receivables, and balance sheet
aging of receivables method. If it uses the income statement method, bad debt would be estimated at 4% of
credit sales. If it were to use the balance sheet method, it would estimate bad debt at 12% of accounts
receivable. If it were to use the balance sheet aging of receivables method, it would split its receivables into
three categories: 0–30 days past due at 6%, 31–90 days past due at 19%, and over 90 days past due at 26%.
There is currently a zero balance, transferred from the prior year’s Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. The
following information is available from the year-end income statement and balance sheet.

There is also additional information regarding the distribution of accounts receivable by age.

Prepare the year-end adjusting entry for bad debt, using
A.

Income statement method

B.

Balance sheet method of receivables

C.

Balance sheet aging of receivables method.

D.

Which method should the company choose, and why?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

B

637

Problem Set B

PB1.

9.1 Prepare journal entries for the following transactions from Lumber Wholesale.

Aug. 9

Sold 48,320 pounds of lumber with a sales price of $5.50 per pound to customer Homes
Unlimited. Homes Unlimited paid with cash. The cost for this sale is $1.35 per pound.

Aug. 10

Sold 34,700 pounds of lumber with a sales price of $6.75 per pound to customer Barry Njegren.
Njegren paid using his in-house credit account. Terms of the sale are 4/15, n/35. The cost for this
sale is $1.20 per pound.

Aug. 11

Sold 50,330 pounds of lumber with a sales price of $4.60 per pound to customer Goodson
Houses. Goodson paid using its American credit card. The cost for this sale is $1.40 per pound.
American Credit Card Company charged Lumber Wholesale a 2.5% usage fee based on the total
sale per transaction.

Aug. 14

American Credit Card Company made a cash payment in full to Lumber Wholesale for the
transaction from August 11, less any usage fees.

Aug. 25
PB2.

Barry Njegren paid his account in full with a cash payment, less any discounts.

9.1 Prepare journal entries for the following transactions of Maritime Memories.

May 2

Sold $864,920 worth of maritime products to customer Jordan Scott. Jordan paid using his inhouse credit account; terms 3/15, n/60. The cost to Maritime Memories for this sale is $532,187.

May 6

Sold $567,120 worth of maritime products to customer Joe Hsu. Joe paid using his Longstand
credit card. The cost to Maritime Memories is $321,864. Longstand Credit Card Company
charged Maritime Memories a 1.5% usage fee based on the total sale per transaction.

May 16

Jordan Scott paid his account in full with a cash payment, less any discounts.

May 23

Longstand Credit Card Company made a cash payment in full to Maritime Memories for the
transaction from May 6, less any usage fees.

638

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PB3.

9.1 Prepare journal entries for the following transactions from School Mart.

Mar. 6

Sold 1,000 pencil packages with a sales price of $5.72 per package to customer Sonia Norris.
Sonia Norris paid with her American credit card. The American credit card charges School Mart a
4.6% usage fee based on the total sale per transaction. The cost for this sale is $1.27 per
package.

Mar. 8

Sold 76 dry erase boards for a total sales price of $6,535 to Henry Malta. Henry paid in full with
cash. The cost of the sale is $4,308.

Mar. 11

Sold 55 reams of paper with a sales price of $3.25 per ream to customer Alex Forsun. Alex
Forsun paid using his Union credit card. Union charges School Mart a 2% usage fee based on
the total sale per transaction. The cost for this sale is $1.99 per ream.

Mar. 14

American made a cash payment in full to School Mart for the transaction from March 6, less any
usage fees.

Mar. 21

Union made a cash payment of 40% of the total due to School Mart for the transaction from
March 11, less any usage fees.

Mar. 29

Union made a cash payment of the remainder due to School Mart for the transaction from
March 11, less any usage fees.

PB4.

9.2 Bristax Corporation recorded $1,385,660 in credit sales for the year, and $732,410 in accounts

receivable. The uncollectible percentage is 3.1% for the income statement method and 4.5% for the balance
sheet method.
A.

Record the year-end adjusting entry for 2018 bad debt using the income statement method.

B.

Record the year-end adjusting entry for 2018 bad debt using the balance sheet method.

C.

Assume there was a previous debit balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $20,550; record the
year-end entry for bad debt using the income statement method, and then the entry using the balance
sheet method.

D.

Assume there was a previous credit balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $17,430; record the
year-end entry for bad debt using the income statement method, and then the entry using the balance
sheet method.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PB5.

A.

639

9.2 The following accounts receivable information pertains to Select Distributors.

Determine the estimated uncollectible bad debt for Select Distributors in 2018 using the balance sheet
aging of receivables method.

B.

Record the year-end 2018 adjusting journal entry for bad debt.

C.

Assume there was a previous debit balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $233,180; record the
year-end entry for bad debt, taking this into consideration.

D.

Assume there was a previous credit balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $199,440; record the
year-end entry for bad debt, taking this into consideration.

E.

On March 21, 2019, Select Distributors identifies Aida Norman’s account as uncollectible in the amount
of $10,890. Record the entry for identification.

PB6.

9.2 Ink Records recorded $2,333,898 in credit sales for the year and $1,466,990 in accounts receivable.

The uncollectible percentage is 3% for the income statement method and 5% for the balance sheet method.
A.

Record the year-end adjusting entry for 2018 bad debt using the income statement method.

B.

Record the year-end adjusting entry for 2018 bad debt using the balance sheet method.

C.

Assume there was a previous credit balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $20,254; record the
year-end entry for bad debt using the income statement method, and then the entry using the balance
sheet method.

640

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PB7.

9.3 Review the select information for Liquor Plaza and Beer Buddies (industry competitors) and

complete the following.
A.

Compute the accounts receivable turnover ratios for each company for 2018 and 2019.

B.

Compute the number of day’s sales in receivables ratios for each company for 2018 and 2019.

C.

Determine which company is the better investment and why. Round answers to two decimal places.

PB8.

9.3 The following select financial statement information from Vortex Computing.

Compute the accounts receivable turnover ratios and the number of days’ sales in receivables ratios for 2018
and 2019 (round answers to two decimal places). What do the outcomes tell a potential investor about Vortex
Computing if industry average for accounts receivable turnover ratio is 4 times and days’ sales in receivables
ratio is 85 days?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PB9.

641

9.4 Elegant Linens uses the balance sheet aging method to account for uncollectible debt on

receivables. The following is the past-due category information for outstanding receivable debt for 2019.

To manage earnings more favorably, Elegant Linens considers changing the past-due categories as follows.

A.

Complete each table by filling in the blanks.

B.

Determine the difference between total uncollectible.

C.

Complete the following 2019 comparative income statements for 2019, showing net income changes as
a result of the changes to the balance sheet aging method categories.

D.

Describe the categories change effect on net income and accounts receivable.

642

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PB10.

9.4 Goods for Less uses the balance sheet aging method to account for uncollectible debt on

receivables. The following is the past-due category information for outstanding receivable debt for 2019.

To manage earnings more favorably, Goods for Less considers changing the past-due categories as follows.

A.

Complete each table by filling in the blanks.

B.

Determine the difference between totals uncollectible.

C.

Describe the categories change effect on net income and accounts receivable.

PB11.

9.6 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Noreen Turbines.

Jan. 1, 2018

Issued a $1,800,500 note to customer Axel Premium Metal as terms of a merchandise sale.
The merchandise’s cost to Noreen is $760,430. Note contract terms included a 36-month
maturity date, and a 3.8% annual interest rate.

Dec. 31, 2018

Noreen Turbines records interest accumulated for 2018.

Dec. 31, 2019

Noreen Turbines records interest accumulated for 2019.

Dec. 31, 2020

Axel Premium Metal honors the note and pays in full with cash.

PB12.

9.6 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Mesa Construction.

Jan. 1, 2018

Issued a $1,460,200 note to customer Miramar Industries as terms of a merchandise sale.
The merchandise’s cost to Mesa Construction is $812,110. Note contract terms included a
24-month maturity date, and a 3.3% annual interest rate.

Dec. 31, 2018

Mesa Construction records interest accumulated for 2018.

Dec. 31, 2019

Mesa Construction converts Miramar Industries’ dishonored note into account receivable.
This includes accumulated interest for the 24-month period.

Apr. 4, 2020

Mesa Construction sells the outstanding debt from Miramar Industries to a collection
agency at 40% of the accounts receivable value.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

PB13.

643

9.6 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Graphics & Signs.

Jan. 1, 2018

Issued a $248,400 note to customer Elliott Thompson as terms of a merchandise sale. The
merchandise’s cost to Graphics & Signs is $99,500. Note contract terms included a
36-month maturity date, and a 4.3% annual interest rate.

Dec. 31, 2018

Graphics & Signs records interest accumulated for 2018.

Dec. 31, 2019

Graphics & Signs records interest accumulated for 2019.

Dec. 31, 2020

Elliott Thompson honors the note and pays in full with cash.

PB14.

9.6 Record journal entries for the following transactions of Trout Masters.

Jan. 1, 2018

Issued a $390,820 note to customer Fishing Warehouse as terms of a merchandise sale.
The merchandise’s cost to Trout Masters is $155,770. Note contract terms included a
24-month maturity date, and a 3% annual interest rate.

Dec. 31, 2018

Trout Masters records interest accumulated for 2018.

Dec. 31, 2019

Trout Masters converts Fishing Warehouse’s dishonored note into account receivable. This
includes accumulated interest for the 24-month period.

May 6, 2020

Trout Masters sells the outstanding debt from Fishing Warehouse to a collection agency at
40% of the accounts receivable value.

PB15.

9.7 Shimmer Products is considering which bad debt estimation method works best for its company.

It is deciding between the income statement method, balance sheet method of receivables, and balance sheet
aging of receivables method. If it uses the income statement method, bad debt would be estimated at 5.6% of
credit sales. If it were to use the balance sheet method, it would estimate bad debt at 13.7% percent of
accounts receivable. If it were to use the balance sheet aging of receivables method, it would split its
receivables into three categories: 0–30 days past due at 5%, 31–90 days past due at 21%, and over 90 days past
due at 30%. There is currently a zero balance, transferred from the prior year’s Allowance for Doubtful
Accounts. The following information is available from the year-end income statement and balance sheet.

There is also additional information regarding the distribution of accounts receivable by age.

Prepare the year-end adjusting entry for bad debt, using
A.

Income statement method

B.

Balance sheet method of receivables

C.

Balance sheet aging of receivables method

D.

Which method should the company choose, and why?

644

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

Thought Provokers
TP1.

9.1 Review the new revenue recognition guidance issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board

http://www.fasb.org/jsp/FASB/Page/ImageBridgePage&cid=1176169257359 and answer the following
questions.
• What is the new standard as of ASC 606? What does that mean to you?
• What are the recommended steps companies should follow to achieve the core principle?
• How does this change current GAAP standards?
• Who is required to adhere to this new standard?
TP2.

9.2 You run an office supplies chain. You must determine the most appropriate bad debt estimation

method to use for financial statement reporting. Your choices are the income statement, balance sheet, and
balance sheet aging of receivables methods.
• Research a real competitor in your industry and determine which method the competitor selected. Give
a detailed description of the method used and any supporting calculations.
• Create a hypothetical credit sale, an accounts receivable figure for your business, and compute the bad
debt estimation using the competitor’s method.
• Create the journal entry to record bad debt.
• Compute bad debt using the other two methods and show the journal entry for each.
• What are the benefits and challenges for all of these methods?
• Which method would you choose for your business? Explain why.
TP3.

9.3 You are considering a $100,000 investment in one of two publicly traded companies in the same

industry. Review the last three annual financial statements (same fiscal year) for two publicly traded
companies in the same industry. Based on the information obtained, complete the following.
A.

Compute the accounts receivable turnover ratio (round all answers to two decimal places).

B.

Compute the number of days’ sales in receivables ratio for both companies for the two most current
years (round all answers to two decimal places).

C.

Describe and interpret the outcomes, stating which company you would invest in and why.

D.

What information is missing that could help you make a more informed decision?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

TP4.

645

9.4 You are considering two possible companies for investment purposes. The following data is

available for each company.

Additional Information: Company A: Bad debt estimation percentage using the income statement method is
6%, and the balance sheet method is 10%. The $230,000 in Other Expenses includes all company expenses
except Bad Debt Expense. Company B: Bad debt estimation percentage using the income statement method is
6.5%, and the balance sheet method is 8%. The $140,000 in Other Expenses includes all company expenses
except Bad Debt Expense.
A.

Compute the number of days’ sales in receivables ratio for each company for 2019 and interpret the
results (round answers to nearest whole number).

B.

If Company A changed from the income statement method to the balance sheet method for
recognizing bad debt estimation, how would that change net income in 2019? Explain (show
calculations).

C.

If Company B changed from the balance sheet method to the income statement method for
recognizing bad debt estimation, how would that change net income in 2019? Explain (show
calculations).

D.

What benefits do each company gain by changing their method of bad debt estimation?

E.

Which company would you invest in and why? Provide supporting details.

TP5.

9.5 You own a construction company and have recently received a contract with the local school

district to refurbish one of its elementary schools. You are given an up-front payment from the school district
in the amount of $5 million. The contract terms extend from years 2018 to 2020.
• When would you recognize revenue for this payment?
• What method of accounting would you use for this construction project and why?
• What would be the benefits and challenges with your method selection?
• Give an example of your distribution selection and associated costs of the project (you may estimate
based on other industry competitors).
• What might be some benefits and challenges associated with the other method of construction
revenue recognition?
TP6.

9.6 When a customer is delinquent on paying a notes receivable, your company has the option to

continue to attempt collection or sell the debt to a collection agency. Research the benefits and challenges
with each of these options and in a short essay, answer the following questions.
A.

What are the benefits and challenges of continuing to attempt collection yourself?

B.

What are the benefits and challenges of selling debt to a collection agency?

C.

If you had a dishonored notes receivable, which option would you select and why?

D.

Would you weight certain benefits or challenges differently when making your selection? How?

646

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 9 Accounting for Receivables

10

Inventory
Figure 10.1 Inventory. (credit: modification of “warehouse pallet food” by “jaymethunt”/Pixabay, CC0)

Chapter Outline
10.1 Describe and Demonstrate the Basic Inventory Valuation Methods and Their Cost Flow Assumptions
10.2 Calculate the Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Inventory Using the Periodic Method
10.3 Calculate the Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Inventory Using the Perpetual Method
10.4 Explain and Demonstrate the Impact of Inventory Valuation Errors on the Income Statement and
Balance Sheet
10.5 Examine the Efficiency of Inventory Management Using Financial Ratios

Why It Matters
Did you ever decide to start a healthy eating plan and meticulously planned your shopping list, including foods
for meals, drinks, and snacks? Maybe you stocked your cabinets and fridge with the best healthy foods you
could find, including lots of luscious-looking fruit and vegetables, to make sure that you could make tasty and
healthy smoothies when you got hungry. Then, at the end of the week, if everything didn’t go as you had
planned, you may have discovered that a lot of your produce was still uneaten but not very fresh anymore.
Stocking up on goods, so that you will have them when you need them, is only a good idea if the goods are
used before they become worthless.
Just like with someone whose preparation for healthy eating can backfire in wasted produce, businesses have
to balance a fine line between being prepared for any volume of inventory demand that customers request
and being careful not to overstock those goods so the company will not be left holding excess inventory they
cannot sell. Not having the goods that a customer wants available is bad, of course, but extra inventory is
wasteful. That is one reason why inventory accounting is important.

648

Chapter 10 Inventory

10.1

Describe and Demonstrate the Basic Inventory Valuation Methods and

Their Cost Flow Assumptions
Accounting for inventory is a critical function of management. Inventory accounting is significantly
complicated by the fact that it is an ongoing process of constant change, in part because (1) most companies
offer a large variety of products for sale, (2) product purchases occur at irregular times, (3) products are
acquired for differing prices, and (4) inventory acquisitions are based on sales projections, which are always
uncertain and often sporadic. Merchandising companies must meticulously account for every individual
product that they sell, equipping them with essential information, for decisions such as these:
• What is the quantity of each product that is available to customers?
• When should inventory of each product item be replenished and at what quantity?
• How much should the company charge customers for each product to cover all costs plus profit margin?
• How much of the inventory cost should be allocated toward the units sold (cost of goods sold) during the
period?
• How much of the inventory cost should be allocated toward the remaining units (ending inventory) at the
end of the period?
• Is each product moving robustly or have some individual inventory items’ activity decreased?
• Are some inventory items obsolete?
The company’s financial statements report the combined cost of all items sold as an offset to the proceeds
from those sales, producing the net number referred to as gross margin (or gross profit). This is presented in
the first part of the results of operations for the period on the multi-step income statement. The unsold
inventory at period end is an asset to the company and is therefore included in the company’s financial
statements, on the balance sheet, as shown in Figure 10.2. The total cost of all the inventory that remains at
period end, reported as merchandise inventory on the balance sheet, plus the total cost of the inventory that
was sold or otherwise removed (through shrinkage, theft, or other loss), reported as cost of goods sold on the
income statement (see Figure 10.2), represent the entirety of the inventory that the company had to work with
during the period, or goods available for sale.

Figure 10.2

Financial Statement Effects of Inventory Transactions. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Fundamentals of Inventory
Although our discussion will consider inventory issues from the perspective of a retail company, using a resale
or merchandising operation, inventory accounting also encompasses recording and reporting of
manufacturing operations. In the manufacturing environment, there would be separate inventory calculations
for the various process levels of inventory, such as raw materials, work in process, and finished goods. The

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

649

manufacturer’s finished goods inventory is equivalent to the merchandiser’s inventory account in that it
includes finished goods that are available for sale.
In merchandising companies, inventory is a company asset that includes beginning inventory plus purchases,
which include all additions to inventory during the period. Every time the company sells products to
customers, they dispose of a portion of the company’s inventory asset. Goods available for sale refers to the
total cost of all inventory that the company had on hand at any time during the period, including beginning
inventory and all inventory purchases. These goods were normally either sold to customers during the period
(occasionally lost due to spoilage, theft, damage, or other types of shrinkages) and thus reported as cost of
goods sold, an expense account on the income statement, or these goods are still in inventory at the end of
the period and reported as ending merchandise inventory, an asset account on the balance sheet. As an
example, assume that Harry’s Auto Parts Store sells oil filters. Suppose that at the end of January 31, 2018, they
had 50 oil filters on hand at a cost of $7 per unit. This means that at the beginning of February, they had 50
units in inventory at a total cost of $350 (50 × $7). During the month, they purchased 20 filters at a cost of $7,
for a total cost of $140 (20 × $7). At the end of the month, there were 18 units left in inventory. Therefore,
during the month of February, they sold 52 units. Figure 10.3 illustrates how to calculate the goods available
for sale and the cost of goods sold.

Figure 10.3

Fundamentals of Inventory Accounting. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Inventory costing is accomplished by one of four specific costing methods: (1) specific identification, (2) first-in,
first-out, (3) last-in, first-out, and (4) weighted-average cost methods. All four methods are techniques that
allow management to distribute the costs of inventory in a logical and consistent manner, to facilitate
matching of costs to offset the related revenue item that is recognized during the period, in accordance with
GAAP expense recognition and matching concepts. Note that a company’s cost allocation process represents
management’s chosen method for expensing product costs, based strictly on estimates of the flow of
inventory costs, which is unrelated to the actual flow of the physical inventory. Use of a cost allocation strategy
eliminates the need for often cost-prohibitive individual tracking of costs of each specific inventory item, for
which purchase prices may vary greatly. In this chapter, you will be provided with some background concepts
and explanations of terms associated with inventory as well as a basic demonstration of each of the four
allocation methods, and then further delineation of the application and nuances of the costing methods.
A critical issue for inventory accounting is the frequency for which inventory values are updated. There are two
primary methods used to account for inventory balance timing changes: the periodic inventory method and
the perpetual inventory method. These two methods were addressed in depth in Merchandising Transactions).

Periodic Inventory Method
A periodic inventory system updates the inventory balances at the end of the reporting period, typically the

650

Chapter 10 Inventory

end of a month, quarter, or year. At that point, a journal entry is made to adjust the merchandise inventory
asset balance to agree with the physical count of inventory, with the corresponding adjustment to the expense
account, cost of goods sold. This adjustment shifts the costs of all inventory items that are no longer held by
the company to the income statement, where the costs offset the revenue from inventory sales, as reflected by
the gross margin. As sales transactions occur throughout the period, the periodic system requires that only
the sales entry be recorded because costs will only be updated during end-of-period adjustments when
financial statements are prepared. However, any additional goods for sale acquired during the month are
recorded as purchases. Following are examples of typical journal entries for periodic transactions. The first is
an example entry for an inventory sales transaction when using periodic inventory, and the second records the
purchase of additional inventory when using the periodic method. Note: Periodic requires no corresponding
cost entry at the time of sale, since the inventory is adjusted only at period end.

A purchase of inventory for sale by a company under the periodic inventory method would necessitate the
following journal entry. (This is discussed in more depth in Merchandising Transactions.)

Perpetual Inventory Method
A perpetual inventory system updates the inventory account balance on an ongoing basis, at the time of
each individual sale. This is normally accomplished by use of auto-ID technology, such as optical-scan barcode
or radio frequency identification (RFIF) labels. As transactions occur, the perpetual system requires that every
sale is recorded with two entries, first recording the sales transaction as an increase to Accounts Receivable
and a decrease to Sales Revenue, and then recording the cost associated with the sale as an increase to Cost of
Goods Sold and a decrease to Merchandise Inventory. The journal entries made at the time of sale
immediately shift the costs relating to the goods being sold from the merchandise inventory account on the
balance sheet to the cost of goods sold account on the income statement. Little or no adjustment is needed to
inventory at period end because changes in the inventory balances are recorded as both the sales and
purchase transactions occur. Any necessary adjustments to the ending inventory account balances would
typically be caused by one of the types of shrinkage you’ve learned about. These are example entries for an
inventory sales transaction when using perpetual inventory updating:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

651

A purchase of inventory for sale by a company under the perpetual inventory method would necessitate the
following journal entry. (Greater detail is provided in Merchandising Transactions.)

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Inventory
As previously discussed, Gearhead Outfitters is a retail chain selling outdoor gear and accessories. As
such, the company is faced with many possible questions related to inventory. How much inventory
should be carried? What products are the most profitable? Which products have the most sales? Which
products are obsolete? What timeframe should the company allow for inventory to be replenished?
Which products are the most in demand at each location?
In addition to questions related to type, volume, obsolescence, and lead time, there are many issues
related to accounting for inventory and the flow of goods. As one of the biggest assets of the company,
the way inventory is tracked can have an effect on profit. Which method of accounting—first-in first-out,
last-in first out, specific identification, weighted average— provides the most accurate reflection of
inventory and cost of goods sold is important in determining gross profit and net income. The method
selected affects profits, taxes, and can even change the opinion of potential lenders concerning the
financial strength of the company. In choosing a method of accounting for inventory, management
should consider many factors, including the accurate reflection of costs, taxes on profits, decisionmaking about purchases, and what effect a point-of-sale (POS) system may have on tracking inventory.
Gearhead exists to provide a positive shopping experience for its customers. Offering a clear picture of
its goods, and maintaining an appealing, timely supply at competitive prices is one way to keep the
shopping experience positive. Thus, accounting for inventory plays an instrumental role in
management’s ability to successfully run a company and deliver the company’s promise to customers.

Data for Demonstration of the Four Basic Inventory Valuation Methods
The following dataset will be used to demonstrate the application and analysis of the four methods of
inventory accounting.
Company: Spy Who Loves You Corporation
Product: Global Positioning System (GPS) Tracking Device
Description: This product is an economical real-time GPS tracking device, designed for individuals who wish to
monitor others’ whereabouts. It is marketed to parents of middle school and high school students as a safety
measure. Parents benefit by being apprised of the child’s location, and the student benefits by not having to
constantly check in with parents. Demand for the product has spiked during the current fiscal period, while

652

Chapter 10 Inventory

supply is limited, causing the selling price to escalate rapidly.

Specific Identification Method
The specific identification method refers to tracking the actual cost of the item being sold and is generally
used only on expensive items that are highly customized (such as tracking detailed costs for each individual
car in automobiles sales) or inherently distinctive (such as tracking origin and cost for each unique stone in
diamond sales). This method is too cumbersome for goods of large quantity, especially if there are not
significant feature differences in the various inventory items of each product type. However, for purposes of
this demonstration, assume that the company sold one specific identifiable unit, which was purchased in the
second lot of products, at a cost of $27.
Three separate lots of goods are purchased:

First-in, First-out (FIFO) Method
The first-in, first-out method (FIFO) records costs relating to a sale as if the earliest purchased item would be
sold first. However, the physical flow of the units sold under both the periodic and perpetual methods would
be the same. Due to the mechanics of the determination of costs of goods sold under the perpetual method,
based on the timing of additional purchases of inventory during the accounting period, it is possible that the
costs of goods sold might be slightly different for an accounting period. Since FIFO assumes that the first
items purchased are sold first, the latest acquisitions would be the items that remain in inventory at the end of
the period and would constitute ending inventory.
Three separate lots of goods are purchased:

Last-in, First-out (LIFO) Method
The last-in, first out method (LIFO) records costs relating to a sale as if the latest purchased item would be
sold first. As a result, the earliest acquisitions would be the items that remain in inventory at the end of the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

period.
Three separate lots of goods are purchased:

IFRS CONNECTION
Inventory
For many companies, inventory is a significant portion of the company’s assets. In 2018, the inventory of
Walmart, the world’s largest international retailer, was 70% of current assets and 21% of total assets.
Because inventory also affects income as it is sold through the cost of goods sold account, inventory
plays a significant role in the analysis and evaluation of many companies. Ending inventory affects both
the balance sheet and the income statement. As you’ve learned, the ending inventory balance is
reflected as a current asset on the balance sheet and the ending inventory balance is used in the
calculation of costs of goods sold. Understanding how companies report inventory under US GAAP
versus under IFRS is important when comparing companies reporting under the two methods,
particularly because of a significant difference between the two methods.
Similarities
• When inventory is purchased, it is accounted for at historical cost and then evaluated at each
balance sheet date to adjust to the lower of cost or net realizable value.
• Both IFRS and US GAAP allow FIFO and weighted-average cost flow assumptions as well as specific
identification where appropriate and applicable.
Differences
• IFRS does not permit the use of LIFO. This is a major difference between US GAAP and IFRS. The
AICPA estimates that roughly 35–40% of all US companies use LIFO, and in some industries, such as
oil and gas, the use of LIFO is more prevalent. Because LIFO generates lower taxable income during
times of rising prices, it is estimated that eliminating LIFO would generate an estimated $102 billion
in tax revenues in the US for the period 2017–2026. In creating IFRS, the IASB chose to eliminate
LIFO, arguing that FIFO more closely matches the flow of goods. In the US, FASB believes the choice
between LIFO and FIFO is a business model decision that should be left up to each company. In
addition, there was significant pressure by some companies and industries to retain LIFO because of
the significant tax liability that would arise for many companies from the elimination of LIFO.

Weighted-Average Cost Method
The weighted-average cost method (sometimes referred to as the average cost method) requires a
calculation of the average cost of all units of each particular inventory items. The average is obtained by

653

654

Chapter 10 Inventory

multiplying the number of units by the cost paid per unit for each lot of goods, then adding the calculated total
value of all lots together, and finally dividing the total cost by the total number of units for that product. As a
caveat relating to the average cost method, note that a new average cost must be calculated after every
change in inventory to reassess the per-unit weighted-average value of the goods. This laborious requirement
might make use of the average method cost-prohibitive.
Three separate lots of goods are purchased:

Comparing the various costing methods for the sale of one unit in this simple example reveals a significant
difference that the choice of cost allocation method can make. Note that the sales price is not affected by the
cost assumptions; only the cost amount varies, depending on which method is chosen. Figure 10.4 depicts the
different outcomes that the four methods produced.

Figure 10.4

Comparison of the Four Costing Methods. One unit sold for $36. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Once the methods of costing are determined for the company, that methodology would typically be applied
repeatedly over the remainder of the company’s history to accomplish the generally accepted accounting
principle of consistency from one period to another. It is possible to change methods if the company finds
that a different method more accurately reflects results of operations, but the change requires disclosure in
the company’s notes to the financial statements, which alerts financial statement users of the impact of the
change in methodology. Also, it is important to realize that although the Internal Revenue Service generally
allows differing methods of accounting treatment for tax purposes than for financial statement purposes, an
exception exists that prohibits the use of LIFO inventory costing on the company tax return unless LIFO is also
used for the financial statement costing calculations.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Auditors Look for Inventory Fraud
Inventory fraud can be used to book false revenue or to increase the amount of assets to obtain
additional lending from a bank or other sources. In the typical chain of accounting events, inventory
ultimately becomes an expense item known as cost of goods sold.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

[1]

In a manipulated accounting system,

Chapter 10 Inventory

655

a trail of fraudulent transactions can point to accounting misrepresentation in the sales cycle, which may
include
• recording fictitious and nonexistent inventory,
• manipulation of inventory counts during a facility audit,
• recording of sales but no recording of purchases, and/or
• fraudulent inventory capitalization,
to list a few.

[2]

All these elaborate schemes have the same goal: to improperly manipulate inventory

values to support the creation of a fraudulent financial statement. Accountants have an ethical, moral,
and legal duty to not commit accounting and financial statement fraud. Auditors have a duty to look for
such inventory fraud.
Auditors follow the Statement on Auditing Standards (SAS) No. 99 and AU Section 316 Consideration of
Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit when auditing a company’s books. Auditors are outside accountants
hired to “obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement, whether caused by error or fraud.”

[3]

Ultimately, an auditor will prepare an audit report

based on the testing of the balances in a company’s books, and a review of the company’s accounting
system. The auditor is to perform “procedures at locations on a surprise or unannounced basis, for
example, observing inventory on unexpected dates or at unexpected locations or counting cash on a
surprise basis.”

[4]

Such testing of a company’s inventory system is used to catch accounting fraud. It is

the responsibility of the accountant to present accurate accounting records to the auditor, and for the
auditor to create auditing procedures that reasonably ensure that the inventory balances are free of
material misstatements in the accounting balances.

Additional Inventory Issues
Various other issues that affect inventory accounting include consignment sales, transportation and
ownership issues, inventory estimation tools, and the effects of inflationary versus deflationary cycles on
various methods.

Consignment
Consigned goods refer to merchandise inventory that belongs to a third party but which is displayed for sale
by the company. These goods are not owned by the company and thus must not be included on the
company’s balance sheet nor be used in the company’s inventory calculations. The company’s profit relating
to consigned goods is normally limited to a percentage of the sales proceeds at the time of sale.
For example, assume that you sell your office and your current furniture doesn’t match your new building.

1 “Inventory Fraud: Knowledge Is Your First Line of Defense.” Weaver. Mar. 27, 2015. https://weaver.com/blog/inventory-fraud-knowledgeyour-first-line-defense
2 Wells, Joseph T. “Ghost Goods: How to Spot Phantom Inventory.” Journal of Accountancy. June 1, 2001.
https://www.journalofaccountancy.com/issues/2001/jun/ghostgoodshowtospotphantominventory.html
3 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit (AU Section 316).
https://www.aicpa.org/Research/Standards/AuditAttest/DownloadableDocuments/AU-00316.pdf
4 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit (AU Section 316).
https://www.aicpa.org/Research/Standards/AuditAttest/DownloadableDocuments/AU-00316.pdf

656

Chapter 10 Inventory

One way to dispose of the furniture would be to have a consignment shop sell it. The shop would keep a
percentage of the sales revenue and pay you the remaining balance. Assume in this example that the shop will
keep one-third of the sales proceeds and pay you the remaining two-thirds balance. If the furniture sells for
$15,000, you would receive $10,000 and the shop would keep the remaining $5,000 as its sales commission. A
key point to remember is that until the inventory, in this case your office furniture, is sold, you still own it, and
it is reported as an asset on your balance sheet and not an asset for the consignment shop. After the sale, the
buyer is the owner, so the consignment shop is never the property’s owner.

Free on Board (FOB) Shipping and Destination
Transportation costs are commonly assigned to either the buyer or the seller based on the free on board (FOB)
terms, as the terms relate to the seller. Transportation costs are part of the responsibilities of the owner of the
product, so determining the owner at the shipping point identifies who should pay for the shipping costs. The
seller’s responsibility and ownership of the goods ends at the point that is listed after the FOB designation.
Thus, FOB shipping point means that the seller transfers title and responsibility to the buyer at the shipping
point, so the buyer would owe the shipping costs. The purchased goods would be recorded on the buyer’s
balance sheet at this point.
Similarly, FOB destination means the seller transfers title and responsibility to the buyer at the destination, so
the seller would owe the shipping costs. Ownership of the product is the trigger that mandates that the asset
be included on the company’s balance sheet. In summary, the goods belong to the seller until they transition
to the location following the term FOB, making the seller responsible for everything about the goods to that
point, including recording purchased goods on the balance sheet . If something happens to damage or
destroy the goods before they reach the FOB location, the seller would be required to replace the product or
reverse the sales transaction.

Lower-of-Cost-or-Market (LCM)
Reporting inventory values on the balance sheet using the accounting concept of conservatism (which
discourages overstatement of net assets and net income) requires inventory to be calculated and adjusted to a
value that is the lower of the cost calculated using the company’s chosen valuation method or the market
value based on the market or replacement value of the inventory items. Thus, if traditional cost calculations
produce inventory values that are overstated, the lower-of-cost-or-market (LCM) concept requires that the
balance in the inventory account should be decreased to the more conservative replacement value rather than
be overstated on the balance sheet.

Estimating Inventory Costs: Gross Profit Method and Retail Inventory Method
Sometimes companies have a need to estimate inventory values. These estimates could be needed for interim
reports, when physical counts are not taken. The need could be result from a natural disaster that destroys
part or all of the inventory or from an error that causes inventory counts to be compromised or omitted. Some
specific industries (such as select retail businesses) also regularly use these estimation tools to determine cost
of goods sold. Although the method is predictable and simple, it is also less accurate since it is based on
estimates rather than actual cost figures.
The gross profit method is used to estimate inventory values by applying a standard gross profit percentage
to the company’s sales totals when a physical count is not possible. The resulting gross profit can then be
subtracted from sales, leaving an estimated cost of goods sold. Then the ending inventory can be calculated by

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

657

subtracting cost of goods sold from the total goods available for sale. Likewise, the retail inventory method
estimates the cost of goods sold, much like the gross profit method does, but uses the retail value of the
portions of inventory rather than the cost figures used in the gross profit method.

Inflationary Versus Deflationary Cycles
As prices rise (inflationary times), FIFO ending inventory account balances grow larger even when inventory
unit counts are constant, while the income statement reflects lower cost of goods sold than the current prices
for those goods, which produces higher profits than if the goods were costed with current inventory prices.
Conversely, when prices fall (deflationary times), FIFO ending inventory account balances decrease and the
income statement reflects higher cost of goods sold and lower profits than if goods were costed at current
inventory prices. The effect of inflationary and deflationary cycles on LIFO inventory valuation are the exact
opposite of their effects on FIFO inventory valuation.

LINK TO LEARNING
Accounting Coach does a great job in explaining inventory issues (and so many other accounting topics
too): Learn more about inventory and cost of goods sold (https://openstax.org/l/50inventory) on their
website.

THINK IT THROUGH
First-in, First-out (FIFO)
Suppose you are the assistant controller for a retail establishment that is an independent bookseller. The
company uses manual, periodic inventory updating, using physical counts at year end, and the FIFO
method for inventory costing. How would you approach the subject of whether the company should
consider switching to computerized perpetual inventory updating? Can you present a persuasive
argument for the benefits of perpetual? Explain.

10.2

Calculate the Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Inventory Using the

Periodic Method
As you’ve learned, the periodic inventory system is updated at the end of the period to adjust inventory
numbers to match the physical count and provide accurate merchandise inventory values for the balance
sheet. The adjustment ensures that only the inventory costs that remain on hand are recorded, and the
remainder of the goods available for sale are expensed on the income statement as cost of goods sold. Here
we will demonstrate the mechanics used to calculate the ending inventory values using the four cost allocation
methods and the periodic inventory system.

658

Chapter 10 Inventory

Information Relating to All Cost Allocation Methods, but Specific to Periodic Inventory
Updating
Let’s return to the example of The Spy Who Loves You Corporation to demonstrate the four cost allocation
methods, assuming inventory is updated at the end of the period using the periodic system.

Cost Data for Calculations
Company: Spy Who Loves You Corporation
Product: Global Positioning System (GPS) Tracking Device
Description: This product is an economical real-time GPS tracking device, designed for individuals who wish to
monitor others’ whereabouts. It is being marketed to parents of middle school and high school students as a
safety measure. Parents benefit by being apprised of the child’s location, and the student benefits by not
having to constantly check in with parents. Demand for the product has spiked during the current fiscal
period, while supply is limited, causing the selling price to escalate rapidly. Note: For simplicity of
demonstration, beginning inventory cost is assumed to be $21 per unit for all cost assumption methods.

Specific Identification
The specific units assumed to be sold in this period are designated as follows, with the specific inventory
distinction being associated with the lot numbers:
• Sold 120 units, all from Lot 1 (beginning inventory), costing $21 per unit
• Sold 180 units, 20 from Lot 1 (beginning inventory), costing $21 per unit; 160 from the Lot 2 (July 10
purchase), costing $27 per unit
The specific identification method of cost allocation directly tracks each of the units purchased and costs them
out as they are actually sold. In this demonstration, assume that some sales were made by specifically tracked
goods that are part of a lot, as previously stated for this method. So for The Spy Who Loves You, considering
the entire period together, note that
• 140 of the 150 units that were purchased for $21 were sold, leaving 10 of $21 units remaining
• 160 of the 225 units that were purchased for $27 were sold, leaving 65 of the $27 units remaining
• none of the 210 units that were purchased for $33 were sold, leaving all 210 of the $33 units remaining
Ending inventory was made up of 10 units at $21 each, 65 units at $27 each, and 210 units at $33 each, for a
total specific identification ending inventory value of $8,895. Subtracting this ending inventory from the
$16,155 total of goods available for sale leaves $7,260 in cost of goods sold this period.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

659

Calculations of Costs of Goods Sold, Ending Inventory, and Gross Margin, Specific Identification
The specific identification costing assumption tracks inventory items individually, so that when they are sold,
the exact cost of the item is used to offset the revenue from the sale. The cost of goods sold, inventory, and
gross margin shown in Figure 10.5 were determined from the previously-stated data, particular to specific
identification costing.

Figure 10.5

Specific Identification Costing Assumption Cost of Goods Sold and Cost Value. (attribution:

Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The gross margin, resulting from the specific identification periodic cost allocations of $7,260, is shown in
Figure 10.6.

Figure 10.6

Specific Identification Periodic Cost Allocations Gross Margin. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Calculation for the Ending Inventory Adjustment under Periodic/Specific Identification Methods
Merchandise inventory, before adjustment, had a balance of $3,150, which was the beginning inventory.
Journal entries are not shown, but the following calculations provide the information that would be used in
recording the necessary journal entries. The inventory at the end of the period should be $8,895, requiring an
entry to increase merchandise inventory by $5,745. Cost of goods sold was calculated to be $7,260, which
should be recorded as an expense. The credit entry to balance the adjustment is $13,005, which is the total
amount that was recorded as purchases for the period. This entry distributes the balance in the purchases
account between the inventory that was sold (cost of goods sold) and the amount of inventory that remains at
period end (merchandise inventory).

First-in, First-out (FIFO)
The first-in, first-out method (FIFO) of cost allocation assumes that the earliest units purchased are also the
first units sold. For The Spy Who Loves You, considering the entire period, 300 of the 585 units available for the
period were sold, and if the earliest acquisitions are considered sold first, then the units that remain under
FIFO are those that were purchased last. Following that logic, ending inventory included 210 units purchased
at $33 and 75 units purchased at $27 each, for a total FIFO periodic ending inventory value of $8,955.
Subtracting this ending inventory from the $16,155 total of goods available for sale leaves $7,200 in cost of

660

Chapter 10 Inventory

goods sold this period.

Calculations of Costs of Goods Sold, Ending Inventory, and Gross Margin, First-in, First-out (FIFO)
The FIFO costing assumption tracks inventory items based on segments or lots of goods that are tracked, in
the order that they were acquired, so that when they are sold, the earliest acquired items are used to offset
the revenue from the sale. The cost of goods sold, inventory, and gross margin shown in Figure 10.7 were
determined from the previously-stated data, particular to FIFO costing.

Figure 10.7

FIFO Costing Assumption Cost of Goods Sold and Cost Value. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The gross margin, resulting from the FIFO periodic cost allocations of $7,200, is shown in Figure 10.8.

Figure 10.8

FIFO Periodic Cost Allocations Gross Margin. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Calculations for Inventory Adjustment, Periodic/First-in, First-out (FIFO)
Beginning merchandise inventory had a balance of $3,150 before adjustment. The inventory at period end
should be $8,955, requiring an entry to increase merchandise inventory by $5,895. Journal entries are not
shown, but the following calculations provide the information that would be used in recording the necessary
journal entries. Cost of goods sold was calculated to be $7,200, which should be recorded as an expense. The
credit entry to balance the adjustment is for $13,005, which is the total amount that was recorded as
purchases for the period. This entry distributes the balance in the purchases account between the inventory
that was sold (cost of goods sold) and the amount of inventory that remains at period end (merchandise

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

661

inventory).

Last-in, First-out (LIFO)
The last-in, first-out method (LIFO) of cost allocation assumes that the last units purchased are the first units
sold. For The Spy Who Loves You, considering the entire period together, 300 of the 585 units available for the
period were sold, and if the latest acquisitions are considered sold first, then the units that remain under LIFO
are those that were purchased first. Following that logic, ending inventory included 150 units purchased at $21
and 135 units purchased at $27 each, for a total LIFO periodic ending inventory value of $6,795. Subtracting
this ending inventory from the $16,155 total of goods available for sale leaves $9,360 in cost of goods sold this
period.

It is important to note that these answers can differ when calculated using the perpetual method. When
perpetual methodology is utilized, the cost of goods sold and ending inventory are calculated at the time of
each sale rather than at the end of the month. For example, in this case, when the first sale of 150 units is
made, inventory will be removed and cost computed as of that date from the beginning inventory. The
differences in timing as to when cost of goods sold is calculated can alter the order that costs are sequenced.

Calculations of Costs of Goods Sold, Ending Inventory, and Gross Margin, Last-in, First-out (LIFO)
The LIFO costing assumption tracks inventory items based on lots of goods that are tracked, in the order that
they were acquired, so that when they are sold, the latest acquired items are used to offset the revenue from
the sale. The following cost of goods sold, inventory, and gross margin were determined from the previouslystated data, particular to LIFO costing.

Figure 10.9

LIFO Costing Assumption Cost of Goods Sold and Cost Value. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

662

Chapter 10 Inventory

The gross margin, resulting from the LIFO periodic cost allocations of $9,360, is shown in Figure 10.10.

Figure 10.10

LIFO Periodic Cost Allocations Gross Margin. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Calculations for Inventory Adjustment, Periodic/Last-in, First-out (LIFO)
Beginning merchandise inventory had a balance before adjustment of $3,150. The inventory at period end
should be $6,795, requiring an entry to increase merchandise inventory by $3,645. Journal entries are not
shown, but the following calculations provide the information that would be used in recording the necessary
journal entries. Cost of goods sold was calculated to be $9,360, which should be recorded as an expense. The
credit entry to balance the adjustment is for $13,005, which is the total amount that was recorded as
purchases for the period. This entry distributes the balance in the purchases account between the inventory
that was sold (cost of goods sold) and the amount of inventory that remains at period end (merchandise
inventory).

Weighted-Average Cost (AVG)
Weighted-average cost allocation requires computation of the average cost of all units in goods available for
sale at the time the sale is made. For The Spy Who Loves You, considering the entire period, the weightedaverage cost is computed by dividing total cost of goods available for sale ($16,155) by the total number of
available units (585) to get the average cost of $27.62. Note that 285 of the 585 units available for sale during
the period remained in inventory at period end. Following that logic, ending inventory included 285 units at an
average cost of $27.62 for a total AVG periodic ending inventory value of $7,872. Subtracting this ending
inventory from the $16,155 total of goods available for sale leaves $8,283 in cost of goods sold this period. It is
important to note that final numbers can often differ by one or two cents due to rounding of the calculations.
In this case, the cost comes to $27.6154 but rounds up to the stated cost of $27.62.

Calculations of Costs of Goods Sold, Ending Inventory, and Gross Margin, Weighted Average (AVG)
The AVG costing assumption tracks inventory items based on lots of goods that are tracked but averages the
cost of all units on hand every time an addition is made to inventory so that, when they are sold, the most
recently averaged cost items are used to offset the revenue from the sale. The cost of goods sold, inventory,
and gross margin shown in Figure 10.11 were determined from the previously-stated data, particular to AVG
costing.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

Figure 10.11

663

AVG Costing Assumption Cost of Goods Sold and Cost Value. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Figure 10.12 shows the gross margin resulting from the weighted-average periodic cost allocations of $8283.

Figure 10.12

Weighted AVG Periodic Cost Allocations Gross Margin. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Journal Entries for Inventory Adjustment, Periodic/Weighted Average
Beginning merchandise inventory had a balance before adjustment of $3,150. The inventory at period end
should be $7,872, requiring an entry to increase merchandise inventory by $4,722. Journal entries are not
shown, but the following calculations provide the information that would be used in recording the necessary
journal entries. Cost of goods sold was calculated to be $8,283, which should be recorded as an expense. The
credit entry to balance the adjustment is for $13,005, which is the total amount that was recorded as
purchases for the period. This entry distributes the balance in the purchases account between the inventory
that was sold (cost of goods sold) and the amount of inventory that remains at period end (merchandise
inventory).

10.3

Calculate the Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Inventory Using the

Perpetual Method
As you’ve learned, the perpetual inventory system is updated continuously to reflect the current status of
inventory on an ongoing basis. Modern sales activity commonly uses electronic identifiers—such as bar codes
and RFID technology—to account for inventory as it is purchased, monitored, and sold. Specific identification
inventory methods also commonly use a manual form of the perpetual system. Here we’ll demonstrate the
mechanics implemented when using perpetual inventory systems in inventory accounting, whether those
calculations are orchestrated in a laborious manual system or electronically (in the latter, the inventory
accounting operates effortlessly behind the scenes but nonetheless utilizes the same perpetual methodology).

664

Chapter 10 Inventory

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Perpetual Inventory’s Advancements through Technology
Perpetual inventory has been seen as the wave of the future for many years. It has grown since the 1970s
alongside the development of affordable personal computers. Universal product codes, commonly
known as UPC barcodes, have advanced inventory management for large and small retail organizations,
allowing real-time inventory counts and reorder capability that increased popularity of the perpetual
inventory system. These UPC codes identify specific products but are not specific to the particular batch
of goods that were produced. Electronic product codes (EPCs) such as radio frequency identifiers (RFIDs)
are essentially an evolved version of UPCs in which a chip/identifier is embedded in the EPC code that
matches the goods to the actual batch of product that was produced. This more specific information
allows better control, greater accountability, increased efficiency, and overall quality monitoring of goods
in inventory. The technology advancements that are available for perpetual inventory systems make it
nearly impossible for businesses to choose periodic inventory and forego the competitive advantages
that the technology offers.

Information Relating to All Cost Allocation Methods, but Specific to Perpetual Inventory
Updating
Let’s return to The Spy Who Loves You Corporation data to demonstrate the four cost allocation methods,
assuming inventory is updated on an ongoing basis in a perpetual system.

Cost Data for Calculations
Company: Spy Who Loves You Corporation
Product: Global Positioning System (GPS) Tracking Device
Description: This product is an economical real-time GPS tracking device, designed for individuals who wish to
monitor others’ whereabouts. It is being marketed to parents of middle school and high school students as a
safety measure. Parents benefit by being apprised of the child’s location, and the student benefits by not
having to constantly check in with parents. Demand for the product has spiked during the current fiscal
period, while supply is limited, causing the selling price to escalate rapidly. Note: For simplicity of
demonstration, beginning inventory cost is assumed to be $21 per unit for all cost assumption methods.

Calculations for Inventory Purchases and Sales during the Period, Perpetual Inventory Updating
Regardless of which cost assumption is chosen, recording inventory sales using the perpetual method involves

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

665

recording both the revenue and the cost from the transaction for each individual sale. As additional inventory
is purchased during the period, the cost of those goods is added to the merchandise inventory account.
Normally, no significant adjustments are needed at the end of the period (before financial statements are
prepared) since the inventory balance is maintained to continually parallel actual counts.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Ethical Short-Term Decision Making
When management and executives participate in unethical or fraudulent short-term decision making, it
can negatively impact a company on many levels. According to Antonia Chion, Associate Director of the
SEC’s Division of Enforcement, those who participate in such activities will be held accountable.

[5]

For

example, in 2015, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) charged two former top executives of
OCZ Technology Group Inc. for accounting failures.

[6]

The SEC alleged that OCZ’s former CEO Ryan

Petersen engaged in a scheme to materially inflate OCZ’s revenues and gross margins from 2010 to
2012, and that OCZ’s former chief financial officer Arthur Knapp participated in certain accounting,
disclosure, and internal accounting controls failures.
Petersen and Knapp allegedly participated in channel stuffing, which is the process of recognizing and
recording revenue in a current period that actually will be legally earned in one or more future fiscal
periods. A common example is to arrange for customers to submit purchase orders in the current year,
often with the understanding that if they don’t need the additional inventory then they may return the
inventory received or cancel the order if delivery has not occurred.

[7]

When the intention behind channel

stuffing is to mislead investors, it crosses the line into fraudulent practice. This and other unethical shortterm accounting decisions made by Petersen and Knapp led to the bankruptcy of the company they were
supposed to oversee and resulted in fraud charges from the SEC. Practicing ethical short-term decision
making may have prevented both scenarios.

Specific Identification
For demonstration purposes, the specific units assumed to be sold in this period are designated as follows,
with the specific inventory distinction being associated with the lot numbers:
• Sold 120 units, all from Lot 1 (beginning inventory), costing $21 per unit
• Sold 180 units, 20 from Lot 1 (beginning inventory), costing $21 per unit; 160 from Lot 2 (July 10 purchase),
costing $27 per unit
The specific identification method of cost allocation directly tracks each of the units purchased and costs them
out as they are sold. In this demonstration, assume that some sales were made by specifically tracked goods
that are part of a lot, as previously stated for this method. For The Spy Who Loves You, the first sale of 120

5 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). “SEC Charges Former Executives with Accounting Fraud and Other Accounting Failures.”
October 6, 2015. https://www.sec.gov/news/pressrelease/2015-234.html
6 SEC v. Ryan Petersen, No. 15-cv-04599 (N.D. Cal. filed October 6, 2015). https://www.sec.gov/litigation/litreleases/2017/lr23874.htm
7 George B. Parizek and Madeleine V. Findley. Charting a Course: Revenue Recognition Practices for Today’s Business Environment. 2008.
https://www.sidley.com/-/media/files/publications/2008/10/charting-a-course-revenue-recognition-practices-__/files/view-article/
fileattachment/chartingacourse.pdf

666

Chapter 10 Inventory

units is assumed to be the units from the beginning inventory, which had cost $21 per unit, bringing the total
cost of these units to $2,520. Once those units were sold, there remained 30 more units of the beginning
inventory. The company bought 225 more units for $27 per unit. The second sale of 180 units consisted of 20
units at $21 per unit and 160 units at $27 per unit for a total second-sale cost of $4,740. Thus, after two sales,
there remained 10 units of inventory that had cost the company $21, and 65 units that had cost the company
$27 each. The last transaction was an additional purchase of 210 units for $33 per unit. Ending inventory was
made up of 10 units at $21 each, 65 units at $27 each, and 210 units at $33 each, for a total specific
identification perpetual ending inventory value of $8,895.

Calculations of Costs of Goods Sold, Ending Inventory, and Gross Margin, Specific Identification
The specific identification costing assumption tracks inventory items individually so that, when they are sold,
the exact cost of the item is used to offset the revenue from the sale. The cost of goods sold, inventory, and
gross margin shown in Figure 10.13 were determined from the previously-stated data, particular to specific
identification costing.

Figure 10.13

Specific Identification Costing Assumption Cost of Goods Sold, Inventory, and Cost Value.

(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Figure 10.14 shows the gross margin, resulting from the specific identification perpetual cost allocations of
$7,260.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

Figure 10.14

667

Specific Identification Perpetual Cost Allocations Gross Margin. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Description of Journal Entries for Inventory Sales, Perpetual, Specific Identification
Journal entries are not shown, but the following discussion provides the information that would be used in
recording the necessary journal entries. Each time a product is sold, a revenue entry would be made to record
the sales revenue and the corresponding accounts receivable or cash from the sale. Because of the choice to
apply perpetual inventory updating, a second entry made at the same time would record the cost of the item
based on the actual cost of the items, which would be shifted from merchandise inventory (an asset) to cost of
goods sold (an expense).

First-in, First-out (FIFO)
The first-in, first-out method (FIFO) of cost allocation assumes that the earliest units purchased are also the
first units sold. For The Spy Who Loves You, using perpetual inventory updating, the first sale of 120 units is
assumed to be the units from the beginning inventory, which had cost $21 per unit, bringing the total cost of
these units to $2,520. Once those units were sold, there remained 30 more units of beginning inventory. The
company bought 225 more units for $27 per unit. At the time of the second sale of 180 units, the FIFO
assumption directs the company to cost out the last 30 units of the beginning inventory, plus 150 of the units
that had been purchased for $27. Thus, after two sales, there remained 75 units of inventory that had cost the
company $27 each. The last transaction was an additional purchase of 210 units for $33 per unit. Ending
inventory was made up of 75 units at $27 each, and 210 units at $33 each, for a total FIFO perpetual ending
inventory value of $8,955.

Calculations of Costs of Goods Sold, Ending Inventory, and Gross Margin, First-in, First-out (FIFO)
The FIFO costing assumption tracks inventory items based on lots of goods that are tracked, in the order that
they were acquired, so that when they are sold the earliest acquired items are used to offset the revenue from
the sale. The cost of goods sold, inventory, and gross margin shown in Figure 10.15 were determined from the
previously-stated data, particular to perpetual FIFO costing.

668

Figure 10.15

Chapter 10 Inventory

FIFO Costing Assumption Cost of Goods Purchased, Cost of Goods Sold, and Cost of Inventory

Remaining. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Figure 10.16 shows the gross margin, resulting from the FIFO perpetual cost allocations of $7,200.

Figure 10.16

FIFO Perpetual Cost Allocations Gross Margin. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Description of Journal Entries for Inventory Sales, Perpetual, First-in, First-out (FIFO)
Journal entries are not shown, but the following discussion provides the information that would be used in
recording the necessary journal entries. Each time a product is sold, a revenue entry would be made to record
the sales revenue and the corresponding accounts receivable or cash from the sale. When applying perpetual
inventory updating, a second entry made at the same time would record the cost of the item based on FIFO,
which would be shifted from merchandise inventory (an asset) to cost of goods sold (an expense).

Last-in, First-out (LIFO)
The last-in, first-out method (LIFO) of cost allocation assumes that the last units purchased are the first units
sold. For The Spy Who Loves You, using perpetual inventory updating, the first sale of 120 units is assumed to
be the units from the beginning inventory (because this was the only lot of good available, so it represented
the last purchased lot), which had cost $21 per unit, bringing the total cost of these units in the first sale to
$2,520. Once those units were sold, there remained 30 more units of beginning inventory. The company

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

669

bought 225 more units for $27 per unit. At the time of the second sale of 180 units, the LIFO assumption
directs the company to cost out the 180 units from the latest purchased units, which had cost $27 for a total
cost on the second sale of $4,860. Thus, after two sales, there remained 30 units of beginning inventory that
had cost the company $21 each, plus 45 units of the goods purchased for $27 each. The last transaction was an
additional purchase of 210 units for $33 per unit. Ending inventory was made up of 30 units at $21 each, 45
units at $27 each, and 210 units at $33 each, for a total LIFO perpetual ending inventory value of $8,775.

Calculations of Costs of Goods Sold, Ending Inventory, and Gross Margin, Last-in, First-out (LIFO)
The LIFO costing assumption tracks inventory items based on lots of goods that are tracked in the order that
they were acquired, so that when they are sold, the latest acquired items are used to offset the revenue from
the sale. The following cost of goods sold, inventory, and gross margin were determined from the previouslystated data, particular to perpetual, LIFO costing.

Figure 10.17

LIFO Costing Assumption Cost of Goods Purchased, Cost of Goods Sold, and Cost of Inventory

Remaining. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Figure 10.18 shows the gross margin resulting from the LIFO perpetual cost allocations of $7,380.

Figure 10.18

LIFO Perpetual Cost Allocations Gross Margin. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

670

Chapter 10 Inventory

Description of Journal Entries for Inventory Sales, Perpetual, Last-in, First-out (LIFO)
Journal entries are not shown, but the following discussion provides the information that would be used in
recording the necessary journal entries. Each time a product is sold, a revenue entry would be made to record
the sales revenue and the corresponding accounts receivable or cash from the sale. When applying apply
perpetual inventory updating, a second entry made at the same time would record the cost of the item based
on LIFO, which would be shifted from merchandise inventory (an asset) to cost of goods sold (an expense).

LINK TO LEARNING
Visit this Amazon inventory video for a little insight into some of the inventory challenges experienced by
retail giant Amazon (https://openstax.org/l/50Amazon) to learn more.

Weighted-Average Cost (AVG)
Weighted-average cost allocation requires computation of the average cost of all units in goods available for
sale at the time the sale is made for perpetual inventory calculations. For The Spy Who Loves You, the first sale
of 120 units is assumed to be the units from the beginning inventory (because this was the only lot of good
available, so the price of these units also represents the average cost), which had cost $21 per unit, bringing
the total cost of these units in the first sale to $2,520. Once those units were sold, there remained 30 more
units of the inventory, which still had a $21 average cost. The company bought 225 more units for $27 per unit.
Recalculating the average cost, after this purchase, is accomplished by dividing total cost of goods available for
sale (which totaled $6,705 at that point) by the number of units held, which was 255 units, for an average cost
of $26.29 per unit. At the time of the second sale of 180 units, the AVG assumption directs the company to cost
out the 180 at $26.29 for a total cost on the second sale of $4,732. Thus, after two sales, there remained 75
units at an average cost of $26.29 each. The last transaction was an additional purchase of 210 units for $33
per unit. Recalculating the average cost again resulted in an average cost of $31.24 per unit. Ending inventory
was made up of 285 units at $31.24 each for a total AVG perpetual ending inventory value of $8,902
(rounded).

[8]

Calculations of Costs of Goods Sold, Ending Inventory, and Gross Margin, Weighted Average (AVG)
The AVG costing assumption tracks inventory items based on lots of goods that are combined and re-averaged
after each new acquisition to determine a new average cost per unit so that, when they are sold, the latest
averaged cost items are used to offset the revenue from the sale. The cost of goods sold, inventory, and gross
margin shown in Figure 10.19 were determined from the previously-stated data, particular to perpetual, AVG
costing.

8

Note that there is a $1 rounding difference due to the rounding of cents inherent in the cost determination chain process.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

Figure 10.19

671

AVG Costing Assumption Cost of Goods Purchased, Cost of Goods Sold, and Cost of Inventory

Remaining. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Figure 10.20 shows the gross margin, resulting from the weighted-average perpetual cost allocations of
$7,253.

Figure 10.20

Weighted AVG Perpetual Cost Allocations Gross Margin. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Description of Journal Entries for Inventory Sales, Perpetual, Weighted Average (AVG)
Journal entries are not shown, but the following discussion provides the information that would be used in
recording the necessary journal entries. Each time a product is sold, a revenue entry would be made to record
the sales revenue and the corresponding accounts receivable or cash from the sale. When applying perpetual
inventory updating, a second entry would be made at the same time to record the cost of the item based on
the AVG costing assumptions, which would be shifted from merchandise inventory (an asset) to cost of goods
sold (an expense).

Comparison of All Four Methods, Perpetual
The outcomes for gross margin, under each of these different cost assumptions, is summarized in
Figure 10.21.

672

Chapter 10 Inventory

Figure 10.21

Gross Margin Comparison. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-

SA 4.0 license)

THINK IT THROUGH
Last-in, First-out (LIFO)
Two-part consideration: 1) Why do you think a company would ever choose to use perpetual LIFO as its
costing method? It is clearly more trouble to calculate than other methods and doesn’t really align with
the natural flow of the merchandise, in most cases. 2) Should the order in which the items are actually
sold determine which costs are used to offset sales revenues from those goods? Explain your
understanding of these issues.

10.4

Explain and Demonstrate the Impact of Inventory Valuation Errors on

the Income Statement and Balance Sheet
Because of the dynamic relationship between cost of goods sold and merchandise inventory, errors in
inventory counts have a direct and significant impact on the financial statements of the company. Errors in
inventory valuation cause mistaken values to be reported for merchandise inventory and cost of goods sold
due to the toggle effect that changes in either one of the two accounts have on the other. As explained, the
company has a finite amount of inventory that they can work with during a given period of business
operations, such as a year. This limited quantity of goods is known as goods available for sale and is sourced
from
1. beginning inventory (unsold goods left over from the previous period’s operations); and
2. purchases of additional inventory during the current period.
These available inventory items (goods available for sale) will be handled in one of two ways:
1. be sold to customers (normally) or be lost due to shrinkage, spoilage, or theft (occasionally), and reported
as cost of goods sold on the income statement; OR
2. be unsold and held in ending inventory, to be passed into the next period, and reported as merchandise
inventory on the balance sheet.

Fundamentals of the Impact of Inventory Valuation Errors on the Income Statement and
Balance Sheet
Understanding this interaction between inventory assets (merchandise inventory balances) and inventory
expense (cost of goods sold) highlights the impact of errors. Errors in the valuation of ending merchandise
inventory, which is on the balance sheet, produce an equivalent corresponding error in the company’s cost of

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

673

goods sold for the period, which is on the income statement. When cost of goods sold is overstated, inventory
and net income are understated. When cost of goods sold is understated, inventory and net income are
overstated. Further, an error in ending inventory carries into the next period, since ending inventory of one
period becomes the beginning inventory of the next period, causing both the balance sheet and the income
statement values to be wrong in year two as well as in the year of the error. Over a two-year period,
misstatements of ending inventory will balance themselves out. For example, an overstatement to ending
inventory overstates net income, but next year, since ending inventory becomes beginning inventory, it
understates net income. So over a two-year period, this corrects itself. However, financial statements are
prepared for one period, so all this means is that two years of cost of goods sold are misstated (the first year is
overstated/understated, and the second year is understated/overstated.)
In periodic inventory systems, inventory errors commonly arise from careless oversight of physical counts.
Another common cause of periodic inventory errors results from management neglecting to take the physical
count. Both perpetual and periodic updating inventory systems also face potential errors relating to ownership
transfers during transportation (relating to FOB shipping point and FOB destination terms); losses in value
due to shrinkage, theft, or obsolescence; and consignment inventory, the goods for which should never be
included in the retailer’s inventory but should be recorded as an asset of the consignor, who remains the legal
owner of the goods until they are sold.

Calculated Income Statement and Balance Sheet Effects for Two Years
Let’s return to The Spy Who Loves You Company dataset to demonstrate the effects of an inventory error on
the company’s balance sheet and income statement. Example 1 (shown in Figure 10.22) depicts the balance
sheet and income statement toggle when no inventory error is present. Example 2 (see Figure 10.23) shows
the balance sheet and income statement inventory toggle, in a case when a $1,500 understatement error
occurred at the end of year 1.

Figure 10.22

Example 1. Assume these values to be correct (no inventory error). This chart shows excerpted

values from The Spy Who Loves You Company’s financial statements without inventory errors. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

674

Chapter 10 Inventory

Figure 10.23

Example 2. Assume these values to be incorrect (with inventory error). This chart shows

excerpted values from The Spy Who Loves You Company’s financial statements with inventory errors.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Comparing the two examples with and without the inventory error highlights the significant effect the error
had on the net results reported on the balance sheet and income statements for the two years. Users of
financial statements make important business and personal decisions based on the data they receive from the
statements and errors of this sort provide those users with faulty information that could negatively affect the
quality of their decisions. In these examples, the combined net income was identical for the two years and the
error worked itself out at the end of the second year, yet year 1 and year 2 were incorrect and not
representative of the true activity of the business for those periods of time. Extreme care should be taken to
value inventories accurately.

10.5

Examine the Efficiency of Inventory Management Using Financial Ratios

Inventory is a large investment for many companies so it is important that this asset be managed wisely. Too
little inventory means lost sales opportunities, whereas too much inventory means unproductive investment of
resources as well as extra costs related to storage, care, and protection of the inventory. Ratio analysis is used
to measure how well management is doing at maintaining just the right amount of inventory for the needs of
their particular business.
Once calculated, these ratios should be compared to previous years’ ratios for the company, direct
competitors’ ratios, industry ratios, and other industries’ ratios. The insights gained from the ratio analysis
should be used to augment analysis of the general strength and stability of the company, with the full data
available in the annual report, including financial statements and notes to the financial statement.

Fundamentals of Inventory Ratios
Inventory ratio analysis relates to how well the inventory is being managed. Two ratios can be used to assess

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

675

how efficiently management is handling inventory. The first ratio, inventory turnover, measures the number of
times an average quantity of inventory was bought and sold during the period. The second ratio, number of
days’ sales in inventory, measures how many days it takes to complete the cycle between buying and selling
inventory.

Calculating and Interpreting the Inventory Turnover Ratio
Inventory turnover ratio is computed by dividing cost of goods sold by average inventory. The ratio
measures the number of times inventory rotated through the sales cycle for the period. Let’s review how this
works for The Spy Who Loves You dataset. This example scenario relates to the FIFO periodic cost allocation,
using those previously calculated values for year 1 cost of goods sold, beginning inventory, and ending
inventory, and assuming a 10% increase in inventory activity for year 2, as shown in Figure 10.24.

Figure 10.24

Excerpts from Financial Statements of The Spy Who Loves You Company. (attribution:

Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The inventory turnover ratio is calculated by dividing cost of goods sold by average inventory. The result for
the Spy Who Loves You Company indicates that the inventory cycled through the sales cycle 1.19 times in year
1, and 0.84 times in year 2.

The fact that the year 2 inventory turnover ratio is lower than the year 1 ratio is not a positive trend. This result
would alert management that the inventory balance might be too high to be practical for this volume of sales.
Comparison should also be made to competitor and industry ratios, while consideration should also be given
to other factors affecting the company’s financial health as well as the strength of the overall market
economy.

Calculating and Interpreting the Days’ Sales in Inventory Ratio
Number of days’ sales in inventory ratio is computed by dividing average merchandise inventory by the

676

Chapter 10 Inventory

average daily cost of goods sold. The ratio measures the number of days it would take to clear the remaining
inventory. Let’s review this using The Spy Who Loves You dataset. The example scenario relates to the FIFO
periodic cost allocation, using those previously calculated values for year 1 cost of goods sold, beginning
inventory, and ending inventory, and assuming a 10% increase in inventory activity for year 2, as in
Figure 10.25.

Figure 10.25

Excerpts from Financial Statements of The Spy Who Loves You Company. (attribution:

Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The number of days’ sales in inventory ratio is calculated by dividing average inventory by average daily cost
of goods sold. The result for the Spy Who Loves You indicates that it would take about 307 days to clear the
average inventory held in year 1 and about 433 days to clear the average inventory held in year 2.

Year 2’s number of days’ sales in inventory ratio increased over year 1’s ratio results, indicating an unfavorable
change. This result would alert management that it is taking much too long to sell the inventory, so reduction
in the inventory balance might be appropriate, or as an alternative, increased sales efforts could turn the ratio
toward a more positive trend. This ratio is useful to identify cases of obsolescence, which is especially
prevalent in an evolving market, such as the technology sector of the economy. As with any ratio, comparison
should also be made to competitor and industry ratios, while consideration should also be given to other
factors affecting the company’s financial health, as well as to the strength of the overall market economy.

LINK TO LEARNING
Check out Investopedia for help with calculation and analysis of ratios and their discussion about the
inventory turnover ratio (https://openstax.org/l/50TurnoverRatio) to learn more.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

677

Key Terms
conservatism concept that if there is uncertainty in a potential financial estimate, a company should err on
the side of caution and report the most conservative amount
consignment arrangement whereby goods are available to sell by one party, but owned by another party,
without transfer of ownership
consistency principle accounting methods applied in a like manner, across multiple periods, allow for
contrast and comparison between periods
first-in, first-out method (FIFO) inventory cost allocation method that assumes the earliest acquired
inventory items are the first to be sold
FOB destination point transportation terms whereby the seller transfers ownership and financial
responsibility at the time of delivery
FOB shipping point transportation terms whereby the seller transfers ownership and financial responsibility
at the time of shipment
goods available for sale total of all inventory (beginning inventory plus purchased inventory); will either be
sold this period or held in period-end inventory
gross profit net profit from sale of goods; sales revenue minus cost of goods sold
gross profit method inventory estimation tool that uses a company’s usual gross profit percentage, related
to total sales revenue, to estimate the cost of the ending inventory
inventory turnover ratio computed by dividing cost of goods sold by average inventory; measures number
of times inventory rotated through the sales cycle for the period
last-in, first-out method (LIFO) inventory cost allocation method that assumes the latest acquired
inventory items are the first to sell
lower-of-cost-or-market (LCM) conservatism-based concept that mandates inventory be reported at the
lower of the value of inventory reflected in the general ledger or replacement value
merchandise inventory goods held for sale at a given point in the period
number of days’ sales in inventory ratio computed by dividing average merchandise inventory by average
daily cost of goods sold; measures number of days it would take to clear remaining inventory
periodic inventory system system that is updated at the end of the period, to match the physical count of
goods on hand
perpetual inventory system system that automatically updates and records the inventory account every
time a sale or purchase of inventory occurs
purchases new acquisitions of merchandise inventory during the period
retail inventory method inventory estimation tool that uses a company’s usual gross profit percentage,
related to total sales revenue, to estimate the retail value of the ending inventory, which can then be
reduced to an estimated cost figure
specific identification method inventory cost allocation method that traces actual cost of each specific item,
whether sold or held in inventory; usually used for customized or differentiated products
weighted-average method inventory cost allocation method that calculates the average value inventory
items by weighting each purchase lot’s goods available for sale, before dividing by the total number of
units of that item

Summary
10.1 Describe and Demonstrate the Basic Inventory Valuation Methods and Their Cost Flow Assumptions

678

Chapter 10 Inventory

• The total cost of goods available for sale is a combination of the beginning inventory plus new inventory
purchases. These costs relating to goods available for sale are included in the ending inventory, reported
on the balance sheet, or become part of the cost of goods sold reported on the income statement.
• Merchandise inventory is maintained using either the periodic or the perpetual updating system. Periodic
updating is performed at the end of the period only, whereas perpetual updating is an ongoing activity
that maintains inventory records that are approximately equal to the actual inventory on hand at any
time.
• There are four basic inventory cost flow allocation methods, which are alternative ways to estimate the
cost of the units that are sold and the value of the ending inventory. The costing methods are not
indicative of the flow of the goods, which often moves in a different order than the flow of the costs.
• Utilizing different cost allocation options results in marked differences in reported cost of goods sold, net
income, and inventory balances.
10.2 Calculate the Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Inventory Using the Periodic Method
• The periodic inventory system updates inventory at the end of a fixed accounting period. During the
accounting period, inventory records are not changed, and at the end of the period, inventory records are
adjusted for what was sold and added during the period.
• Companies using the periodic and perpetual method for inventory updating choose between the basic
four cost flow assumption methods, which are first-in, first-out (FIFO); last-in, first-out (LIFO); specific
identification (SI); and weighted average (AVG).
• Periodic inventory systems are still used in practice, but the prevalence of their use has greatly
diminished, with advances in technology and as prices for inventory management software have
significantly decreased.
10.3 Calculate the Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Inventory Using the Perpetual Method
• Perpetual inventory systems maintain inventory balance in the company records in a real-time or slightly
delayed, continuously updated state. No significant adjustments are needed at the end of the period,
before issuing the financial statements.
• Companies using the perpetual method for inventory updating choose between the basic four cost flow
assumption methods, which are first-in, first-out (FIFO); last-in, first-out (LIFO); specific identification (SI);
and weighted average (AVG).
• Most modern inventory systems utilize the perpetual inventory system, due to the benefits it offers for
efficiency, ease of operation, availability of real-time updating, and accuracy.
10.4 Explain and Demonstrate the Impact of Inventory Valuation Errors on the Income Statement and
Balance Sheet
• The value for cost of the goods available for sale is dependent on accurate beginning and ending
inventory numbers. Because of the interrelationship between inventory values and cost of goods sold,
when the inventory values are incorrect, the associated income statement and balance sheet accounts are
also incorrect.
• Inventory errors at the beginning of a reporting period affect only the income statement. Overstatements
of beginning inventory result in overstated cost of goods sold and understated net income. Conversely,
understatements of beginning inventory result in understated cost of goods sold and overstated net
income.
• Inventory errors at the end of a reporting period affect both the income statement and the balance sheet.
Overstatements of ending inventory result in understated cost of goods sold, overstated net income,
overstated assets, and overstated equity. Conversely, understatements of ending inventory result in
overstated cost of goods sold, understated net income, understated assets, and understated equity.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

679

10.5 Examine the Efficiency of Inventory Management Using Financial Ratios
• Inventory ratio analysis tools help management to identify inefficient management practices and pinpoint
troublesome scenarios within their inventory operations processes.
• The inventory turnover ratio measures how fast the inventory sells, which can be useful for inter-period
comparison as well as comparisons with competitor firms.
• The number of days’ sales in inventory ratio indicates how long it takes for inventory to be sold, on
average, which can help the firm identify instances of too much or too little inventory, indicating such
cases as product obsolescence or excess stocking, or the reverse scenario: insufficient inventory, which
could result in customer dissatisfaction and lost sales.

Multiple Choice
1.

10.1 If a company has four lots of products for sale, purchase 1 (earliest) for $17, purchase 2 (middle) for

$15, purchase 3 (middle) for $12, and purchase 4 (latest) for $14, which cost would be assumed to be sold first
using LIFO costing?
A.

$17

B.

$15

C.

$12

D.

$14

2.

10.1 If a company has three lots of products for sale, purchase 1 (earliest) for $17, purchase 2 (middle)

for $15, purchase 3 (latest) for $12, which of the following statements is true?
A.

This is an inflationary cost pattern.

B.

This is a deflationary cost pattern.

C.

The next purchase will cost less than $12.

D.

None of these statements can be verified.

3.

10.1 When inventory items are highly specialized, the best inventory costing method is ________.
A.

specific identification

B.

first-in, first-out

C.

last-in, first-out

D.

weighted average

4.

10.1 If goods are shipped FOB destination, which of the following is true?
A.

Title to the goods will transfer as soon as the goods are shipped.

B.

FOB indicates that a price reduction has been applied to the order.

C.

The seller must pay the shipping.

D.

The seller and the buyer will each pay 50% of the cost.

5.

10.1 On which financial statement would the merchandise inventory account appear?
A.

balance sheet

B.

income statement

C.

both balance sheet and income statement

D.

neither balance sheet nor income statement

680

Chapter 10 Inventory

6.

10.1 When would using the FIFO inventory costing method produce higher inventory account balances

than the LIFO method would?
A.

inflationary times

B.

deflationary times

C.

always

D.

never

7.

10.1 Which accounting rule serves as the primary basis for the lower-of-cost-or-market methodology for

inventory valuation?
A.

conservatism

B.

consistency

C.

optimism

D.

pessimism

8.

10.1 Which type or types of inventory timing system (periodic or perpetual) requires the user to record

two journal entries every time a sale is made.
A.

periodic

B.

perpetual

C.

both periodic and perpetual

D.

neither periodic nor perpetual

9.

10.2 Which of these statements is false?
A.

If cost of goods sold is incorrect, ending inventory is usually incorrect too.

B.

beginning inventory + purchases = cost of goods sold

C.

ending inventory + cost of goods sold = goods available for sale

D.

goods available for sale – beginning inventory = purchases

10.

10.3 Which inventory costing method is almost always done on a perpetual basis?
A.

specific identification

B.

first-in, first-out

C.

last-in, first-out

D.

weighted average

11.

10.3 Which of the following describes features of a perpetual inventory system?
A.

Technology is normally used to record inventory changes.

B.

Merchandise bought is recorded as purchases.

C.

An adjusting journal entry is required at year end, to match physical counts to the asset account.

D.

Inventory is updated at the end of the period.

12.

10.4 Which of the following financial statements would be impacted by a current-year ending inventory

error, when using a periodic inventory updating system?
A.

balance sheet

B.

income statement

C.

neither statement

D.

both statements

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

13.

681

10.4 Which of the following would cause periodic ending inventory to be overstated?
A.

Goods held on consignment are omitted from the physical count.

B.

Goods purchased and delivered, but not yet paid for, are included in the physical count.

C.

Purchased goods shipped FOB destination and not yet delivered are included in the physical count.

D.

None of the above

14.

10.5 Which of the following indicates a positive trend for inventory management?
A.

increasing number of days’ sales in inventory ratio

B.

increasing inventory turnover ratio

C.

increasing cost of goods sold

D.

increasing sales revenue

Questions
1.

10.1 What is meant by the term gross margin?

2.

10.1 Can a business change from one inventory costing method to another any time they wish? Explain.

3.

10.1 Why do consignment arrangements present a challenge in inventory management? Explain.

4.

10.1 Explain the difference between the terms FOB destination and FOB shipping point.

5.

10.1 When would a company use the specific identification method of inventory cost allocation?

6.

10.1 Explain why a company might want to utilize the gross profit method or the retail inventory method

for inventory valuation.
7.

10.1 Describe the goal of the lower-of-cost-or-market concept.

8.

10.1 Describe two separate and distinct ways to calculate goods available for sale.

9.

10.3 Describe costing inventory using first-in, first-out. Address the different treatment, if any, that must

be given for periodic and perpetual inventory updating.
10.

10.3 Describe costing inventory using last-in, first-out. Address the different treatment, if any, that must

be given for periodic and perpetual inventory updating.
11.

10.3 Describe costing inventory using weighted average. Address the different treatment, if any, that

must be given for periodic and perpetual inventory updating.
12.

10.4 How long does it take an inventory error affecting ending inventory to correct itself in the financial

statements? Explain.
13.

10.4 What type of issues would arise that might cause inventory errors?

14.

10.5 Explain the difference between the flow of cost and the flow of goods as it relates to inventory.

15.

10.5 What insights can be gained from inventory ratio analysis, such as inventory turnover ratio and

number of days’ sales in inventory ratio?

682

Chapter 10 Inventory

Exercise Set A
EA1.

10.1 Calculate the goods available for sale for Atlantis Company, in units and in dollar amounts, given

the following facts about their inventory for the period:

EA2.

10.1 E Company accepts goods on consignment from R Company and also purchases goods from S

Company during the current month. E Company plans to sell the merchandise to customers during the
following month. In each of these independent situations, who owns the merchandise at the end of the
current month and should therefore include it in their company’s ending inventory? Choose E, R, or S.
A.

Goods ordered from R, delivered and displayed on E’s showroom floor at the end of the current month.

B.

Goods ordered from S, in transit, with shipping terms FOB destination.

C.

Goods ordered from R, in transit, with no stated shipping terms.

D.

Goods ordered from S, delivered and displayed on E’s showroom floor at the end of the current month,
with shipping terms FOB destination.

E.
EA3.

Goods ordered from S, in transit, with shipping terms FOB shipping point.
10.1 The following information is taken from a company’s records. Applying the lower-of-cost-or-

market approach, what is the correct value that should be reported on the balance sheet for the inventory?

EA4.

10.2 Complete the missing piece of information involving the changes in inventory, and their

relationship to goods available for sale, for the two years shown:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

EA5.

683

10.2 Akira Company had the following transactions for the month.

Calculate the ending inventory dollar value for the period for each of the following cost allocation methods,
using periodic inventory updating. Provide your calculations.
A.

first-in, first-out (FIFO)

B.

last-in, first-out (LIFO)

C.

weighted average (AVG)

EA6.

10.2 Akira Company had the following transactions for the month.

Calculate the gross margin for the period for each of the following cost allocation methods, using periodic
inventory updating. Assume that all units were sold for $25 each. Provide your calculations.
A.

first-in, first-out (FIFO)

B.

last-in, first-out (LIFO)

C.

weighted average (AVG)

EA7.

10.2 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions, assuming periodic inventory

updating and first-in, first-out (FIFO) cost allocation.

EA8.

10.3 Calculate the cost of goods sold dollar value for A65 Company for the month, considering the

following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual inventory updating.
Provide calculations for first-in, first-out (FIFO).

684

EA9.

Chapter 10 Inventory

10.3 Calculate the cost of goods sold dollar value for A66 Company for the month, considering the

following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual inventory updating.
Provide calculations for last-in, first-out (LIFO).

EA10.

10.3 Calculate the cost of goods sold dollar value for A67 Company for the month, considering the

following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual inventory updating.
Provide calculations for weighted average (AVG).

EA11.

10.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions, assuming perpetual inventory

updating and first-in, first-out (FIFO) cost allocation. Assume no beginning inventory.

EA12.

10.3 Prepare Journal entries to record the following transactions, assuming perpetual inventory

updating, and last-in, first-out (LIFO) cost allocation. Assume no beginning inventory.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

EA13.

685

10.4 If a group of inventory items costing $15,000 had been omitted from the year-end inventory

count, what impact would the error have on the following inventory calculations? Indicate the effect (and
amount) as either (a) none, (b) understated $______, or (c) overstated $______.

Inventory Item

None or amount?

Understated or overstated?

Beginning Inventory
Purchases
Goods Available for Sale
Ending Inventory
Cost of Goods Sold
Table 10.1
EA14.

10.4 If Wakowski Company’s ending inventory was actually $86,000 but was adjusted at year end to a

balance of $68,000 in error, what would be the impact on the presentation of the balance sheet and income
statement for the year that the error occurred, if any?
EA15.

10.4 Shetland Company reported net income on the year-end financial statements of $125,000.

However, errors in inventory were discovered after the reports were issued. If inventory was understated by
$15,000, how much net income did the company actually earn?
EA16.

10.5 Compute Altoona Company’s (a) inventory turnover ratio and (b) number of days’ sales in

inventory ratio, using the following information.

EA17.

10.5 Complete the missing pieces of McCarthy Company’s inventory calculations and ratios.

686

Chapter 10 Inventory

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

10.1 Calculate the goods available for sale for Soros Company, in units and in $ (dollar amounts), given

the following facts about their inventory for the period.

EB2.

10.1 X Company accepts goods on consignment from C Company, and also purchases goods from P

Company during the current month. X Company plans to sell the merchandise to customers during the
following month. In each of these independent situations, who owns the merchandise at the end of the
current month, and should therefore include it in their company’s ending inventory? Choose X, C, or P.
A.

Goods ordered from P, in transit, with shipping terms FOB destination.

B.

Goods ordered from P, in transit, with shipping terms FOB shipping point.

C.

Goods ordered from P, inventory in stock, held in storage until floor space is available.

D.

Goods ordered from C, inventory in stock, set aside for customer pickup and payments to finalize sale.

EB3.

10.1 Considering the following information, and applying the lower-of-cost-or-market approach, what

is the correct value that should be reported on the balance sheet for the inventory?

EB4.

10.2 Complete the missing piece of information involving the changes in inventory, and their

relationship to goods available for sale, for the two years shown.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

EB5.

687

10.2 Bleistine Company had the following transactions for the month.

Calculate the ending inventory dollar value for each of the following cost allocation methods, using periodic
inventory updating. Provide your calculations.
A.

first-in, first-out (FIFO)

B.

last-in, first-out (LIFO)

C.

weighted average (AVG)

EB6.

10.2 Bleistine Company had the following transactions for the month.

Calculate the gross margin for the period for each of the following cost allocation methods, using periodic
inventory updating. Assume that all units were sold for $50 each. Provide your calculations.
A.

first-in, first-out (FIFO)

B.

last-in, first-out (LIFO)

C.

weighted average (AVG)

EB7.

10.2 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions, assuming periodic inventory

updating and first-in, first-out (FIFO) cost allocation.

EB8.

10.3 Calculate the cost of goods sold dollar value for B65 Company for the month, considering the

following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual inventory updating.
Provide calculations for first-in, first-out (FIFO).

688

EB9.

Chapter 10 Inventory

10.3 Calculate the cost of goods sold dollar value for B66 Company for the month, considering the

following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual inventory updating.
Provide calculations for last-in, first-out (LIFO).

EB10.

10.3 Calculate the cost of goods sold dollar value for B67 Company for the month, considering the

following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual inventory updating.
Provide calculations for weighted average (AVG).

EB11.

10.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions, assuming perpetual inventory

updating and first-in, first-out (FIFO) cost allocation. Assume no beginning inventory.

EB12.

10.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions, assuming perpetual inventory

updating and last-in, first-out (LIFO) cost allocation. Assume no beginning inventory.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

EB13.

689

10.4 If a group of inventory items costing $3,200 had been double counted during the year-end

inventory count, what impact would the error have on the following inventory calculations? Indicate the effect
(and amount) as either (a) none, (b) understated $______, or (c) overstated $______.

Inventory Item

None or amount?

Understated or overstated?

Beginning Inventory
Purchases
Goods Available for Sale
Ending Inventory
Cost of Goods Sold
Table 10.2
EB14.

10.4 If Barcelona Company’s ending inventory was actually $122,000, but the cost of consigned

goods, with a cost value of $20,000 were accidentally included with the company assets, when making the
year-end inventory adjustment, what would be the impact on the presentation of the balance sheet and
income statement for the year that the error occurred, if any?
EB15.

10.4 Tanke Company reported net income on the year-end financial statements of $850,200.

However, errors in inventory were discovered after the reports were issued. If inventory was overstated by
$21,000, how much net income did the company actually earn?
EB16.

10.5 Compute Westtown Company’s (A) inventory turnover ratio and (B) number of days’ sales in

inventory ratio, using the following information.

EB17.

10.5 Complete the missing pieces of Delgado Company’s inventory calculations and ratios.

690

Chapter 10 Inventory

Problem Set A
PA1.

10.1 When prices are rising (inflation), which costing method would produce the highest value for

gross margin? Choose between first-in, first-out (FIFO); last-in, first-out (LIFO); and weighted average (AVG).
Evansville Company had the following transactions for the month.

Calculate the gross margin for each of the following cost allocation methods, assuming A62 sold just one unit
of these goods for $10,000. Provide your calculations.
A.

first-in, first-out (FIFO)

B.

last-in, first-out (LIFO)

C.

weighted average (AVG)

PA2.

10.2 Trini Company had the following transactions for the month.

Calculate the ending inventory dollar value for each of the following cost allocation methods, using periodic
inventory updating. Provide your calculations.
A.

first-in, first-out (FIFO)

B.

last-in, first-out (LIFO)

C.

weighted average (AVG)

PA3.

10.2 Trini Company had the following transactions for the month.

Calculate the cost of goods sold dollar value for the period for each of the following cost allocation methods,
using periodic inventory updating. Provide your calculations.
A.

first-in, first-out (FIFO)

B.

last-in, first-out (LIFO)

C.

weighted average (AVG)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

PA4.

10.3 Calculate the cost of goods sold dollar value for A74 Company for the sale on March 11,

considering the following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual
inventory updating. Provide calculations for (a) first-in, first-out (FIFO); (b) last-in, first-out (LIFO); and (c)
weighted average (AVG).

PA5.

10.3 Use the first-in, first-out (FIFO) cost allocation method, with perpetual inventory updating, to

calculate (a) sales revenue, (b) cost of goods sold, and c) gross margin for A75 Company, considering the
following transactions.

PA6.

10.3 Use the last-in, first-out (LIFO) cost allocation method, with perpetual inventory updating, to

calculate (a) sales revenue, (b) cost of goods sold, and c) gross margin for A75 Company, considering the
following transactions.

PA7.

10.3 Use the weighted-average (AVG) cost allocation method, with perpetual inventory updating, to

calculate (a) sales revenue, (b) cost of goods sold, and c) gross margin for A75 Company, considering the
following transactions.

PA8.

10.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions, assuming perpetual inventory

updating and first-in, first-out (FIFO) cost allocation. Assume no beginning inventory.

691

692

PA9.

Chapter 10 Inventory

10.3 Calculate a) cost of goods sold, b) ending inventory, and c) gross margin for A76 Company,

considering the following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual
inventory updating. Provide calculations for first-in, first-out (FIFO).

PA10.

10.3 Calculate a) cost of goods sold, b) ending inventory, and c) gross margin for A76 Company,

considering the following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual
inventory updating. Provide calculations for last-in, first-out (LIFO).

PA11.

10.3 Calculate a) cost of goods sold, b) ending inventory, and c) gross margin for A76 Company,

considering the following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual
inventory updating. Provide calculations for weighted average (AVG).

PA12.

10.3 Compare the calculations for gross margin for A76 Company, based on the results of the

perpetual inventory calculations using FIFO, LIFO, and AVG.
PA13.

10.4 Company Elmira reported the following cost of goods sold but later realized that an error had

been made in ending inventory for year 2021. The correct inventory amount for 2021 was 32,000. Once the
error is corrected, (a) how much is the restated cost of goods sold for 2021? and (b) how much is the restated
cost of goods sold for 2022?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

PA14.

693

10.4 Assuming a company’s year-end inventory were overstated by $5,000, indicate the effect

(overstated/understated/no effect) of the error on the following balance sheet and income statement
accounts.
A.

Income Statement: Cost of Goods Sold

B.

Income Statement: Net Income

C.

Balance Sheet: Assets

D.

Balance Sheet: Liabilities

E.

Balance Sheet: Equity

PA15.

10.5 Use the following information relating to Shana Company to calculate the inventory turnover

ratio and the number of days’ sales in inventory ratio.

PA16.

10.5 Use the following information relating to Clover Company to calculate the inventory turnover

ratio, gross margin, and the number of days’ sales in inventory ratio, for years 2022 and 2023.

Problem Set B

B

PB1.

10.1 When prices are falling (deflation), which costing method would produce the highest gross

margin for the following? Choose first-in, first-out (FIFO); last-in, first-out (LIFO); or weighted average,
assuming that B62 Company had the following transactions for the month.

Calculate the gross margin for each of the following cost allocation methods, assuming B62 sold just one unit
of these goods for $400. Provide your calculations.
A.

first-in, first-out (FIFO)

B.

last-in, first-out (LIFO)

C.

weighted average (AVG)

694

Chapter 10 Inventory

PB2.

10.2 DeForest Company had the following transactions for the month.

Calculate the ending inventory dollar value for the period for each of the following cost allocation methods,
using periodic inventory updating. Provide your calculations.
A.

first-in, first-out (FIFO)

B.

last-in, first-out (LIFO)

C.

weighted average (AVG)

PB3.

10.2 DeForest Company had the following transactions for the month.

Calculate the ending inventory dollar value for the period for each of the following cost allocation methods,
using periodic inventory updating. Provide your calculations.
A.

first-in, first-out (FIFO)

B.

last-in, first-out (LIFO)

C.

weighted average (AVG)

PB4.

10.3 Calculate the cost of goods sold dollar value for B74 Company for the sale on November 20,

considering the following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual
inventory updating. Provide calculations for (a) first-in, first-out (FIFO); (b) last-in, first-out (LIFO); and (c)
weighted average (AVG).

PB5.

10.3 Use the first-in, first-out method (FIFO) cost allocation method, with perpetual inventory

updating, to calculate (a) sales revenue, (b) cost of goods sold, and c) gross margin for B75 Company,
considering the following transactions.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

PB6.

695

10.3 Use the last-in, first-out method (LIFO) cost allocation method, with perpetual inventory

updating, to calculate (a) sales revenue, (b) cost of goods sold, and c) gross margin for B75 Company,
considering the following transactions.

PB7.

10.3 Use the weighted-average (AVG) cost allocation method, with perpetual inventory updating, to

calculate (a) sales revenue, (b) cost of goods sold, and c) gross margin for B75 Company, considering the
following transactions.

PB8.

10.3 Prepare journal entries to record the following transactions, assuming perpetual inventory

updating, and last-in, first-out (LIFO) cost allocation. Assume no beginning inventory.

PB9.

10.3 Calculate a) cost of goods sold, b) ending inventory, and c) gross margin for B76 Company,

considering the following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual
inventory updating. Provide calculations for first-in, first-out (FIFO).

696

Chapter 10 Inventory

PB10.

10.3 Calculate a) cost of goods sold, b) ending inventory, and c) gross margin for B76 Company,

considering the following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual
inventory updating. Provide calculations for last-in, first-out (LIFO).

PB11.

10.3 Calculate a) cost of goods sold, b) ending inventory, and c) gross margin for B76 Company,

considering the following transactions under three different cost allocation methods and using perpetual
inventory updating. Provide calculations for weighted average (AVG).

PB12.

10.3 Compare the calculations for gross margin for B76 Company, based on the results of the

perpetual inventory calculations using FIFO, LIFO, and AVG.
PB13.

10.4 Company Edgar reported the following cost of goods sold but later realized that an error had

been made in ending inventory for year 2021. The correct inventory amount for 2021 was 12,000. Once the
error is corrected, (a) how much is the restated cost of goods sold for 2021? and (b) how much is the restated
cost of goods sold for 2022?

PB14.

10.4 Assuming a company’s year-end inventory were understated by $16,000, indicate the effect

(overstated/understated/no effect) of the error on the following balance sheet and income statement
accounts.
A.

Income Statement: Cost of Goods Sold

B.

Income Statement: Net Income

C.

Balance Sheet: Assets

D.

Balance Sheet: Liabilities

E.

Balance Sheet: Equity

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 10 Inventory

PB15.

697

10.5 Use the following information relating to Singh Company to calculate the inventory turnover

ratio and the number of days’ sales in inventory ratio.

PB16.

10.5 Use the following information relating to Medinas Company to calculate the inventory turnover

ratio, gross margin, and the number of days’ sales in inventory ratio, for years 2022 and 2023.

Thought Provokers
TP1.

10.1 Search the SEC website (https://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html) and

locate the latest Form 10-K for a company you would like to analyze. When you are choosing, make sure the
company sells a product (has inventory on the balance sheet and cost of goods sold on the income statement).
Submit a short memo that states the following:
a. The name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen.
b. Answer the following questions from the company’s statement of Form 10-K financial statements:
◦ What amount of merchandise inventory does the company report on their balance sheet?
◦ What amount of cost of goods sold does the company report on their income statement?
Provide the weblink to the company’s Form 10-K, to allow accurate verification of your answers.
TP2.

10.2 Assume your company uses the periodic inventory costing method, and the inventory count left

out an entire warehouse of goods that were in stock at the end of the year, with a cost value of $222,000. How
will this affect your net income in the current year? How will it affect next year’s net income?
TP3.

10.3 Search the internet for recent news items (within the past year) relating to inventory issues.

Submit a short memo describing what you found and explaining why it is important to the future of inventory
accounting or management. For example, this can be related to technology, bar code, RFID, shipping, supply
chain, logistics, or other inventory-related topics that are currently trending. Provide the weblink to the source
of your information.
TP4.

10.3 Search the internet for information about the technological breakthrough relating to inventory

issues, referred to as the Internet of Things (IoT). How do you think the development of such technology will
change the way accountants manage inventory in the future? Provide the weblink to the source or sources of
your information.

698

Chapter 10 Inventory

TP5.

10.4 Consider the dilemma you might someday face if you are the CFO of a company that is struggling

to satisfy investors, creditors, stockholders, and internal company managers. All of these financial statement
users are clamoring for higher profits and more net assets (also known as equity). If at some point, you
suddenly found yourself not meeting the internal and external earnings and equity targets that these parties
expect, you would probably search for some way to make the financial statements look better. What if your
boss, the CEO, suggested that maybe you should make just one simple journal entry to record all the goods
that your company is holding on consignment, as if that significant amount of goods were owned by your
company? She might say that this action on your part would fix a lot of problems at once, since adding the
consigned goods to merchandise inventory would simultaneously increase net assets on the balance sheet
and increase net income on the income statement (since it would decrease cost of goods sold). How would you
respond to this request?
Write a memo, detailing your willingness or not to embrace this suggestion, giving reasons behind your
decision. Remember to exercise diplomacy, even if you must dissent from the opinion of a supervisor. Note
that the challenge of the assignment is to keep your integrity intact while also keeping your job, if possible.
TP6.

10.5 Use a spreadsheet and the following excerpts from Hileah Company’s financial information to

build a template that automatically calculates (A) inventory turnover and (B) number of days’ sales in
inventory, for the year 2018.

TP7.

10.5 Search the SEC website (https://www.sec.gov/edgar/searchedgar/companysearch.html) and

locate the latest Form 10-K for a company you would like to analyze. Submit a short memo that states the
following:
a. The name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen.
b. Describe two items relating to inventory from the company’s notes to financial statements:
◦ one familiar item that you expected to be in the notes to the financial statement, based on this
chapter’s coverage; and
◦ one unfamiliar item that you did not expect to be in the notes to the financial statements.
c. Provide the weblink to the company’s Form 10-K, to allow accurate verification of your answers.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

11

Long-Term Assets
Figure 11.1 Long-Term Assets. A silk-screening machine used to create designs on clothing is a long-term
asset. (credit: modification of “Flat Bed Silk Screen Printing Machine with LED UV Curing System2” by Benny
Zheng/Flickr, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline
11.1 Distinguish between Tangible and Intangible Assets
11.2 Analyze and Classify Capitalized Costs versus Expenses
11.3 Explain and Apply Depreciation Methods to Allocate Capitalized Costs
11.4 Describe Accounting for Intangible Assets and Record Related Transactions
11.5 Describe Some Special Issues in Accounting for Long-Term Assets

Why It Matters
Liam is excited to be graduating from his MBA program and looks forward to having more time to pursue his
business venture. During one of his courses, Liam came up with the business idea of creating trendy workout
attire. For his class project, he started silk-screening vintage album cover designs onto tanks, tees, and yoga
pants. He tested the market by selling his wares on campus and was surprised how quickly and how often he
sold out. In fact, sales were high enough that he decided to go into business for himself. One of his first
decisions involved whether he should continue to pay someone else to silk-screen his designs or do his own
silk-screening. To do his own silk-screening, he would need to invest in a silk-screening machine.
Liam will need to analyze the purchase of a silk-screening machine to determine the impact on his business in
the short term as well as the long term, including the accounting implications related to the expense of this
machine. Liam knows that over time, the value of the machine will decrease, but he also knows that an asset is
supposed to be recorded on the books at its historical cost. He also wonders what costs are considered part of
this asset. Additionally, Liam has learned about the matching principle (expense recognition) but needs to

700

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

learn how that relates to a machine that is purchased in one year and used for many years to help generate
revenue. Liam has a lot of information to consider before making this decision.

11.1

Distinguish between Tangible and Intangible Assets

Assets are items a business owns.

[1]

For accounting purposes, assets are categorized as current versus long

term, and tangible versus intangible. Assets that are expected to be used by the business for more than one
year are considered long-term assets. They are not intended for resale and are anticipated to help generate
revenue for the business in the future. Some common long-term assets are computers and other office
machines, buildings, vehicles, software, computer code, and copyrights. Although these are all considered
long-term assets, some are tangible and some are intangible.

Tangible Assets
An asset is considered a tangible asset when it is an economic resource that has physical substance—it can
be seen and touched. Tangible assets can be either short term, such as inventory and supplies, or long term,
such as land, buildings, and equipment. To be considered a long-term tangible asset, the item needs to be
used in the normal operation of the business for more than one year, not be near the end of its useful life, and
the company must have no plan to sell the item in the near future. The useful life is the time period over
which an asset cost is allocated. Long-term tangible assets are known as fixed assets.
Businesses typically need many different types of these assets to meet their objectives. These assets differ
from the company’s products. For example, the computers that Apple Inc. intends to sell are considered
inventory (a short-term asset), whereas the computers Apple’s employees use for day-to-day operations are
long-term assets. In Liam’s case, the new silk-screening machine would be considered a long-term tangible
asset as he plans to use it over many years to help him generate revenue for his business. Long-term tangible
assets are listed as noncurrent assets on a company’s balance sheet. Typically, these assets are listed under
the category of Property, Plant, and Equipment (PP&E), but they may be referred to as fixed assets or plant
assets.
Apple Inc. lists a total of $33,783,000,000 in total Property, Plant and Equipment (net) on its 2017 consolidated
balance sheet (see Figure 11.2).

[2]

As shown in the figure, this net total includes land and buildings, machinery,

equipment and internal-use software, and leasehold improvements, resulting in a gross PP&E of
$75,076,000,000—less accumulated depreciation and amortization of $41,293,000,000—to arrive at the net
amount of $33,783,000,000.

1 The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) defines assets as “probable future economic benefits obtained or controlled by a
particular entity as a result of past transactions or events” (SFAC No. 6, p. 12).
2 Apple, Inc. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 10-K Filing. November 3, 2017. http://pdf.secdatabase.com/2624/
0000320193-17-000070.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

Figure 11.2

701

Apple Inc.’s Property, Plant and Equipment, Net. This report shows the company’s consolidated

financial statement details as of September 30, 2017, and September 24, 2016 (in millions). (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

LINK TO LEARNING
Recently, there has been a trend involving an increase in the number of intangibles on companies’
balance sheets. As a result, investors need a better understanding of how this will affect their valuation
of these companies. Read this article on intangible assets from The Economist (https://openstax.org/l/
50IntangAsset) for more information.

Intangible Assets
Companies may have other long-term assets used in the operations of the business that they do not intend to
sell, but that do not have physical substance; these assets still provide specific rights to the owner and are
called intangible assets. These assets typically appear on the balance sheet following long-term tangible
assets (see Figure 11.3.)

[3]

Examples of intangible assets are patents, copyrights, franchises, licenses, goodwill,

sometimes software, and trademarks (Table 11.1). Because the value of intangible assets is very subjective, it is
usually not shown on the balance sheet until there is an event that indicates value objectively, such as the
purchase of an intangible asset.
A company often records the costs of developing an intangible asset internally as expenses, not assets,
especially if there is ambiguity in the expense amounts or economic life of the asset. However, there are also
conditions under which the costs can be allocated over the anticipated life of the asset. (The treatment of
intangible asset costs can be quite complex and is taught in advanced accounting courses.)

3 Apple, Inc. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 10-K Filing. November 3, 2017. http://pdf.secdatabase.com/2624/
0000320193-17-000070.pdf

702

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

Figure 11.3

Consolidated Balance Sheets for Apple, Inc. in 2017 and 2016. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Types of Intangible Assets
Asset

Useful Life

Patents

Twenty years

Trademarks

Renewable every ten years

Copyrights

Seventy years beyond death of creator

Goodwill

Indefinite

Table 11.1

THINK IT THROUGH
Categorizing Intangible Assets
Your company has recently hired a star scientist who has a history of developing new technologies. The
company president is excited with the new hire, and questions you, the company accountant, why the
scientist cannot be recorded as an intangible asset, as the scientist will probably provide more value to
the company in the future than any of its other assets. Discuss why the scientist, and employees in

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

703

general, who often provide the greatest value for a company, are not recorded as intangible assets.

Patents
A patent is a contract that provides a company exclusive rights to produce and sell a unique product. The
rights are granted to the inventor by the federal government and provide exclusivity from competition for
twenty years. Patents are common within the pharmaceutical industry as they provide an opportunity for drug
companies to recoup the significant financial investment on research and development of a new drug. Once
the new drug is produced, the company can sell it for twenty years with no direct competition.

THINK IT THROUGH
Research and Development Costs
Jane works in product development for a technology company. She just heard that her employer is
slashing research and development costs. When she asks why, the marketing senior vice president tells
her that current research and development costs are reducing net income in the current year for a
potential but unknown benefit in future years, and that management is concerned about the effect on
stock price. Jane wonders why research and development costs are not capitalized so that the cost would
be matched with the future revenues. Why do you think research and development costs are not
capitalized?

Trademarks and Copyrights
A company’s trademark is the exclusive right to the name, term, or symbol it uses to identify itself or its
products. Federal law allows companies to register their trademarks to protect them from use by others.
Trademark registration lasts for ten years with optional 10-year renewable periods. This protection helps
prevent impersonators from selling a product similar to another or using its name. For example, a burger joint
could not start selling the “Big Mac.” Although it has no physical substance, the exclusive right to a term or
logo has value to a company and is therefore recorded as an asset.
A copyright provides the exclusive right to reproduce and sell artistic, literary, or musical compositions.
Anyone who owns the copyright to a specific piece of work has exclusive rights to that work. Copyrights in the
United States last seventy years beyond the death of the original author. While you might not be overly
interested in what seems to be an obscure law, it actually directly affects you and your fellow students. It is
one of the primary reasons that your copy of the Collected Works of William Shakespeare costs about $40 in your
bookstore or online, while a textbook, such as Principles of Biology or Principles of Accounting, can run in the
hundreds of dollars.

Goodwill
Goodwill is a unique intangible asset. Goodwill refers to the value of certain favorable factors that a business
possesses that allows it to generate a greater rate of return or profit. Such factors include superior
management, a skilled workforce, quality products or service, great geographic location, and overall

704

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

reputation. Companies typically record goodwill when they acquire another business in which the purchase
price is in excess of the fair value of the identifiable net assets. The difference is recorded as goodwill on the
purchaser’s balance sheet. For example, the goodwill of $5,717,000,000 that we see on Apple’s consolidated
balance sheets for 2017 (see Figure 11.3) was created when Apple purchased another business for a purchase
price exceeding the book value of its net assets.

YOUR TURN
Classifying Long-Term Assets as Tangible or Intangible
Your cousin started her own business and wants to get a small loan from a local bank to expand
production in the next year. The bank has asked her to prepare a balance sheet, and she is having
trouble classifying the assets properly. Help her sort through the list below and note the assets that are
tangible long-term assets and those that are intangible long-term assets.
• Cash
• Patent
• Accounts Receivable
• Land
• Investments
• Software
• Inventory
• Note Receivable
• Machinery
• Equipment
• Marketable Securities
• Owner Capital
• Copyright
• Building
• Accounts Payable
• Mortgage Payable
Solution
Tangible long-term assets include land, machinery, equipment, and building. Intangible long-term assets
include patent, software, and copyright.

11.2

Analyze and Classify Capitalized Costs versus Expenses

When a business purchases a long-term asset (used for more than one year), it classifies the asset based on
whether the asset is used in the business’s operations. If a long-term asset is used in the business operations,
it will belong in property, plant, and equipment or intangible assets. In this situation the asset is typically
capitalized. Capitalization is the process by which a long-term asset is recorded on the balance sheet and its
allocated costs are expensed on the income statement over the asset’s economic life. Explain and Apply
Depreciation Methods to Allocate Capitalized Costs addresses the available methods that companies may

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

705

choose for expensing capitalized assets.
Long-term assets that are not used in daily operations are typically classified as an investment. For example, if
a business owns land on which it operates a store, warehouse, factory, or offices, the cost of that land would
be included in property, plant, and equipment. However, if a business owns a vacant piece of land on which
the business conducts no operations (and assuming no current or intermediate-term plans for development),
the land would be considered an investment.

YOUR TURN
Classifying Assets and Related Expenditures
You work at a business consulting firm. Your new colleague, Marielena, is helping a client organize his
accounting records by types of assets and expenditures. Marielena is a bit stumped on how to classify
certain assets and related expenditures, such as capitalized costs versus expenses. She has given you the
following list and asked for your help to sort through it. Help her classify the expenditures as either
capitalized or expensed, and note which assets are property, plant, and equipment.
Expenditures:
• normal repair and maintenance on the manufacturing facility
• cost of taxes on new equipment used in business operations
• shipping costs on new equipment used in business operations
• cost of a minor repair on existing equipment used in business operations
Assets:
• land next to the production facility held for use next year as a place to build a warehouse
• land held for future resale when the value increases
• equipment used in the production process
Solution
Expenditures:
• normal repair and maintenance on the manufacturing facility: expensed
• cost of taxes on new equipment used in business operations: capitalized
• shipping costs on new equipment used in business operations: capitalized
• cost of a minor repair on existing equipment used in business operations: expensed
Assets:
• land next to the production facility held for use next year as a place to build a warehouse: property,
plant, and equipment
• land held for future resale when the value increases: investment
• equipment used in the production process: property, plant, and equipment

Property, Plant, and Equipment (Fixed Assets)
Why are the costs of putting a long-term asset into service capitalized and written off as expenses
(depreciated) over the economic life of the asset? Let’s return to Liam’s start-up business as an example. Liam

706

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

plans to buy a silk-screening machine to help create clothing that he will sell. The machine is a long-term asset,
because it will be used in the business’s daily operation for many years. If the machine costs Liam $5,000 and it
is expected to be used in his business for several years, generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)
require the allocation of the machine’s costs over its useful life, which is the period over which it will produce
revenues. Overall, in determining a company’s financial performance, we would not expect that Liam should
have an expense of $5,000 this year and $0 in expenses for this machine for future years in which it is being
used. GAAP addressed this through the expense recognition (matching) principle, which states that expenses
should be recorded in the same period with the revenues that the expense helped create. In Liam’s case, the
$5,000 for this machine should be allocated over the years in which it helps to generate revenue for the
business. Capitalizing the machine allows this to occur. As stated previously, to capitalize is to record a longterm asset on the balance sheet and expense its allocated costs on the income statement over the asset’s
economic life. Therefore, when Liam purchases the machine, he will record it as an asset on the financial
statements.

When capitalizing an asset, the total cost of acquiring the asset is included in the cost of the asset. This
includes additional costs beyond the purchase price, such as shipping costs, taxes, assembly, and legal fees.
For example, if a real estate broker is paid $8,000 as part of a transaction to purchase land for $100,000, the
land would be recorded at a cost of $108,000.
Over time as the asset is used to generate revenue, Liam will need to depreciate the asset.
Depreciation is the process of allocating the cost of a tangible asset over its useful life, or the period of time
that the business believes it will use the asset to help generate revenue. This process will be described in
Explain and Apply Depreciation Methods to Allocate Capitalized Costs.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
How WorldCom’s Improper Capitalization of Costs Almost Shut Down the Internet
In 2002, telecommunications giant WorldCom filed for the largest Chapter 11 bankruptcy to date, a
situation resulting from manipulation of its accounting records. At the time, WorldCom operated nearly a
third of the bandwidth of the twenty largest US internet backbone routes, connecting over 3,400 global
networks that serviced more than 70,000 businesses in 114 countries.

[4]

WorldCom used a number of accounting gimmicks to defraud investors, mainly including capitalizing
costs that should have been expensed. Under normal circumstances, this might have been considered
just another account fiasco leading to the end of a company. However, WorldCom controlled a large
percentage of backbone routes, a major component of the hardware supporting the internet, as even the
Securities and Exchange Commission recognized.

[5]

If WorldCom’s bankruptcy due to accounting

malfeasance shut the company down, then the internet would no longer be functional.
If such an event was to happen today, it could shut down international commerce and would be

4

Cybertelecom. “WorldCom (UNNET).” n.d. http://www.cybertelecom.org/industry/wcom.htm

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

707

considered a national emergency. As demonstrated by WorldCom, the unethical behavior of a few
accountants could have shut down the world’s online businesses and international commerce. An
accountant’s job is fundamental and important: keep businesses operating in a transparent fashion.

Investments
A short-term or long-term asset that is not used in the day-to-day operations of the business is considered an
investment and is not expensed, since the company does not expect to use up the asset over time. On the
contrary, the company hopes that the assets (investment) would grow in value over time. Short-term
investments are investments that are expected to be sold within a year and are recorded as current assets.

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Investment in Property in the Grocery Industry
To remain viable, companies constantly look to invest in upgrades in long-term assets. Such acquisitions
might include new machinery, buildings, warehouses, or even land in order to expand operations or
make the work process more efficient. Think back to the last time you walked through a grocery store.
Were you mostly focused on getting the food items on your list? Or did you plan to pick up a prescription
and maybe a coffee once you finished?
Grocery stores have become a one-stop shopping environment, and investments encompass more than
just shelving and floor arrangement. Some grocery chains purchase warehouses to distribute inventory
as needed to various stores. Machinery upgrades can help automate various departments. Some
supermarkets even purchase large parcels of land to build not only their stores, but also surrounding
shopping plazas to draw in customers. All such investments help increase the company’s net profit.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Vehicle Repairs and Enhancements
Automobiles are a useful way of looking at the difference between repair and maintenance expenses and
capitalized modifications. Routine repairs such as brake pad replacements are recorded as repair and
maintenance expense. They are an expected part of owning a vehicle. However, a car may be modified to
change its appearance or performance. For example, if a supercharger is added to a car to increase its
horsepower, the car’s performance is increased, and the cost should be included as a part of the vehicle
asset. Likewise, if replacing the engine of an older car extends its useful life, that cost would also be
capitalized.

5 Dennis R. Beresford, Nicholas DeB. Katzenbach, and C.B. Rogers, Jr. “Special Investigative Committee of the Board of Directors of
WorldCom.” Report of Investigation. March 31, 2003. https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/723527/000093176303001862/dex991.htm

708

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

Repair and Maintenance Costs of Property, Plant, and Equipment
Long-term assets may have additional costs associated with them over time. These additional costs may be
capitalized or expensed based on the nature of the cost. For example, Walmart’s financial statements explain
that major improvements are capitalized, while costs of normal repairs and maintenance are charged to
expense as incurred.
An amount spent is considered a current expense, or an amount charged in the current period, if the amount
incurred did not help to extend the life of or improve the asset. For example, if a service company cleans and
maintains Liam’s silk-screening machine every six months, that service does not extend the useful life of the
machine beyond the original estimate, increase the capacity of the machine, or improve the quality of the silkscreening performed by the machine. Therefore, this maintenance would be expensed within the current
period. In contrast, if Liam had the company upgrade the circuit board of the silk-screening machine, thereby
increasing the machine’s future capabilities, this would be capitalized and depreciated over its useful life.

THINK IT THROUGH
Correcting Errors in Classifying Assets
You work at a business consulting firm. Your new colleague, Marielena, helped a client organize his
accounting records last year by types of assets and expenditures. Even though Marielena was a bit
stumped on how to classify certain assets and related expenditures, such as capitalized costs versus
expenses, she did not come to you or any other more experienced colleagues for help. Instead, she
made the following classifications and gave them to the client who used this as the basis for accounting
transactions over the last year. Thankfully, you have been asked this year to help prepare the client’s
financial reports and correct errors that were made. Explain what impact these errors would have had
over the last year and how you will correct them so you can prepare accurate financial statements.
Expenditures:
• Normal repair and maintenance on the manufacturing facility were capitalized.
• The cost of taxes on new equipment used in business operations was expensed.
• The shipping costs on new equipment used in business operations were expensed.
• The cost of a minor repair on existing equipment used in business operations was capitalized.
Assets:
• Land next to the production facility held for use next year as a place to build a warehouse was
depreciated.
• Land held for future resale when the value increases was classified as Property, Plant, and
Equipment but not depreciated.
• Equipment used in the production process was classified as an investment.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

709

LINK TO LEARNING
Many businesses invest a lot of money in production facilities and operations. Some production
processes are more automated than others, and they require a greater investment in property, plant,
and equipment than production facilities that may be more labor intensive. Watch this video of the
operation of a Georgia-Pacific lumber mill (https://openstax.org/l/50GPLumberMill) and note where you
see all components of property, plant, and equipment in operations in this fascinating production
process. There’s even a reference to an intangible asset—if you watch and listen closely, you just might
catch it.

11.3

Explain and Apply Depreciation Methods to Allocate Capitalized Costs

In this section, we concentrate on the major characteristics of determining capitalized costs and some of the
options for allocating these costs on an annual basis using the depreciation process. In the determination of
capitalized costs, we do not consider just the initial cost of the asset; instead, we determine all of the costs
necessary to place the asset into service. For example, if our company purchased a drill press for $22,000, and
spent $2,500 on sales taxes and $800 for delivery and setup, the depreciation calculation would be based on a
cost of $22,000 plus $2,500 plus $800, for a total cost of $25,300.
We also address some of the terminology used in depreciation determination that you want to familiarize
yourself with. Finally, in terms of allocating the costs, there are alternatives that are available to the company.
We consider three of the most popular options, the straight-line method, the units-of-production method, and
the double-declining-balance method.

YOUR TURN
Calculating Depreciation Costs
Liam buys his silk screen machine for $10,000. He estimates that he can use this machine for five years or
100,000 presses, and that the machine will only be worth $1,000 at the end of its life. He also estimates that he
will make 20,000 clothing items in year one and 30,000 clothing items in year two. Determine Liam’s
depreciation costs for his first two years of business under straight-line, units-of-production, and doubledeclining-balance methods. Also, record the journal entries.
Solution
Straight-line method: ($10,000 – $1,000)/5 = $1,800 per year for both years.

710

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

Units-of-production method: ($10,000 – $1,000)/100,000= $0.09 per press
Year 1 expense: $0.09 × 20,000 = $1,800

Year 2 expense: $0.09 × 30,000 = $2,700

Double-declining-balance method:
Year 1 expense: [($10,000 – 0)/5] × 2 = $4,000

Year 2 expense: [($10,000 – $4,000)/5] × 2 = $2,400

Fundamentals of Depreciation
As you have learned, when accounting for a long-term fixed asset, we cannot simply record an expense for the
cost of the asset and record the entire outflow of cash in one accounting period. Like all other assets, when
purchasing or acquiring a long-term asset, it must be recorded at the historical (initial) cost, which includes all
costs to acquire the asset and put it into use. The initial recording of an asset has two steps:
1. Record the initial purchase on the date of purchase, which places the asset on the balance sheet (as
property, plant, and equipment) at cost, and record the amount as notes payable, accounts payable, or an
outflow of cash.
2. At the end of the period, make an adjusting entry to recognize the depreciation expense. Companies may
record depreciation expense incurred annually, quarterly, or monthly.
Following GAAP and the expense recognition principle, the depreciation expense is recognized over the asset’s
estimated useful life.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

711

Recording the Initial Purchase of an Asset
Assets are recorded on the balance sheet at cost, meaning that all costs to purchase the asset and to prepare
the asset for operation should be included. Costs outside of the purchase price may include shipping, taxes,
installation, and modifications to the asset.
The journal entry to record the purchase of a fixed asset (assuming that a note payable is used for financing
and not a short-term account payable) is shown here.

Applying this to Liam’s silk-screening business, we learn that he purchased his silk-screening machine for
$5,000 by paying $1,000 cash and the remainder in a note payable over five years. The journal entry to record
the purchase is shown here.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Estimating Useful Life and Salvage Value
Useful life and salvage value are estimates made at the time an asset is placed in service. It is common
and expected that the estimates are inaccurate with the uncertainty involved in estimating the future.
Sometimes, however, a company may attempt to take advantage of estimating salvage value and useful
life to improve earnings. A larger salvage value and longer useful life decrease annual depreciation
expense and increase annual net income. An example of this behavior is Waste Management, which was
disciplined by the Securities and Exchange Commission for fraudulently altering its estimates to reduce
depreciation expense and overstate net income by $1.7 billion.

[6]

Components Used in Calculating Depreciation
The expense recognition principle that requires that the cost of the asset be allocated over the asset’s useful
life is the process of depreciation. For example, if we buy a delivery truck to use for the next five years, we
would allocate the cost and record depreciation expense across the entire five-year period. The calculation of
the depreciation expense for a period is not based on anticipated changes in the fair market value of the asset;

6 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “Judge Enters Final Judgment against Former CFO of Waste Management, Inc. Following Jury
Verdict in SEC’s Favor.” January 3, 2008. https://www.sec.gov/news/press/2008/2008-2.htm

712

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

instead, the depreciation is based on the allocation of the cost of owning the asset over the period of its useful
life.
The following items are important in determining and recording depreciation:
• Book value: the asset’s original cost less accumulated depreciation.
• Useful life: the length of time the asset will be productively used within operations.
• Salvage (residual) value: the price the asset will sell for or be worth as a trade-in when its useful life
expires. The determination of salvage value can be an inexact science, since it requires anticipating what
will occur in the future. Often, the salvage value is estimated based on past experiences with similar
assets.
• Depreciable base (cost): the depreciation expense over the asset’s useful life. For example, if we paid
$50,000 for an asset and anticipate a salvage value of $10,000, the depreciable base is $40,000. We expect
$40,000 in depreciation over the time period in which the asset was used, and then it would be sold for
$10,000.
Depreciation records an expense for the value of an asset consumed and removes that portion of the asset
from the balance sheet. The journal entry to record depreciation is shown here.

Depreciation expense is a common operating expense that appears on an income statement. Accumulated
depreciation is a contra account, meaning it is attached to another account and is used to offset the main
account balance that records the total depreciation expense for a fixed asset over its life. In this case, the asset
account stays recorded at the historical value but is offset on the balance sheet by accumulated depreciation.
Accumulated depreciation is subtracted from the historical cost of the asset on the balance sheet to show the
asset at book value. Book value is the amount of the asset that has not been allocated to expense through
depreciation.

In this case, the asset’s book value is $20,000: the historical cost of $25,000 less the accumulated depreciation
of $5,000.
It is important to note, however, that not all long-term assets are depreciated. For example, land is not
depreciated because depreciation is the allocating of the expense of an asset over its useful life. How can one
determine a useful life for land? It is assumed that land has an unlimited useful life; therefore, it is not
depreciated, and it remains on the books at historical cost.
Once it is determined that depreciation should be accounted for, there are three methods that are most

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

713

commonly used to calculate the allocation of depreciation expense: the straight-line method, the units-ofproduction method, and the double-declining-balance method. A fourth method, the sum-of-the-years-digits
method, is another accelerated option that has been losing popularity and can be learned in intermediate
accounting courses. Let’s use the following scenario involving Kenzie Company to work through these three
methods.
Assume that on January 1, 2019, Kenzie Company bought a printing press for $54,000. Kenzie pays shipping
costs of $1,500 and setup costs of $2,500, assumes a useful life of five years or 960,000 pages. Based on
experience, Kenzie Company anticipates a salvage value of $10,000.
Recall that determination of the costs to be depreciated requires including all costs that prepare the asset for
use by the company. The Kenzie example would include shipping and setup costs. Any costs for maintaining or
repairing the equipment would be treated as regular expenses, so the total cost would be $58,000, and, after
allowing for an anticipated salvage value of $10,000 in five years, the business could take $48,000 in
depreciation over the machine’s economic life.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Fixed Assets
You work for Georgia-Pacific as an accountant in charge of the fixed assets subsidiary ledger at a
production and warehouse facility in Pennsylvania. The facility is in the process of updating and replacing
several asset categories, including warehouse storage units, fork trucks, and equipment on the
production line. It is your job to keep the information in the fixed assets subsidiary ledger up to date and
accurate. You need information on original historical cost, estimated useful life, salvage value,
depreciation methods, and additional capital expenditures. You are excited about the new purchases and
upgrades to the facility and how they will help the company serve its customers better. However, you
have been in your current position for only a few years and have never overseen extensive updates, and
you realize that you will have to gather a lot of information at once to keep the accounting records
accurate. You feel overwhelmed and take a minute to catch your breath and think through what you
need. After a few minutes, you realize that you have many people and many resources to work with to
tackle this project. Whom will you work with and how will you go about gathering what you need?

Straight-Line Depreciation
Straight-line depreciation is a method of depreciation that evenly splits the depreciable amount across the
useful life of the asset. Therefore, we must determine the yearly depreciation expense by dividing the

714

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

depreciable base of $48,000 by the economic life of five years, giving an annual depreciation expense of
$9,600. The journal entries to record the first two years of expenses are shown, along with the balance sheet
information. Here are the journal entry and information for year one:

After the journal entry in year one, the press would have a book value of $48,400. This is the original cost of
$58,000 less the accumulated depreciation of $9,600. Here are the journal entry and information for year two:

Kenzie records an annual depreciation expense of $9,600. Each year, the accumulated depreciation balance
increases by $9,600, and the press’s book value decreases by the same $9,600. At the end of five years, the
asset will have a book value of $10,000, which is calculated by subtracting the accumulated depreciation of
$48,000 (5 × $9,600) from the cost of $58,000.

Units-of-Production Depreciation
Straight-line depreciation is efficient, accounting for assets used consistently over their lifetime, but what
about assets that are used with less regularity? The units-of-production depreciation method bases
depreciation on the actual usage of the asset, which is more appropriate when an asset’s life is a function of
usage instead of time. For example, this method could account for depreciation of a printing press for which
the depreciable base is $48,000 (as in the straight-line method), but now the number of pages the press prints
is important.
In our example, the press will have total depreciation of $48,000 over its useful life of 960,000 pages. Therefore,
we would divide $48,000 by 960,000 pages to get a cost per page of $0.05. If Kenzie printed 180,000 pages in
the first year, the depreciation expense would be 180,000 pages × $0.05 per page, or $9,000. The journal entry
to record this expense would be the same as with straight-line depreciation: only the dollar amount would
have changed. The presentation of accumulated depreciation and the calculation of the book value would also
be the same. Kenzie would continue to depreciate the asset until a total of $48,000 in depreciation was taken
after printing 960,000 total pages.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

715

THINK IT THROUGH
Deciding on a Depreciation Method
Liam is struggling to determine which deprecation method he should use for his new silk-screening
machine. He expects sales to increase over the next five years. He also expects (hopes) that in two years
he will need to buy a second silk-screening machine to keep up with the demand for products of his
growing company. Which depreciation method makes more sense for Liam: higher expenses in the first
few years, or keeping expenses consistent over time? Or would it be better for him to not think in terms
of time, but rather in the usage of the machine?

Double-Declining-Balance Depreciation
The double-declining-balance depreciation method is the most complex of the three methods because it
accounts for both time and usage and takes more expense in the first few years of the asset’s life. Doubledeclining considers time by determining the percentage of depreciation expense that would exist under
straight-line depreciation. To calculate this, divide 100% by the estimated life in years. For example, a five-year
asset would be 100/5, or 20% a year. A four-year asset would be 100/4, or 25% a year. Next, because assets are
typically more efficient and “used” more heavily early in their life span, the double-declining method takes
usage into account by doubling the straight-line percentage. For a four-year asset, multiply 25% (100%/4-year
life) × 2, or 50%. For a five-year asset, multiply 20% (100%/5-year life) × 2, or 40%.
One unique feature of the double-declining-balance method is that in the first year, the estimated salvage
value is not subtracted from the total asset cost before calculating the first year’s depreciation expense.
Instead the total cost is multiplied by the calculated percentage. However, depreciation expense is not
permitted to take the book value below the estimated salvage value, as demonstrated in the following text.

Notice that in year four, the remaining book value of $12,528 was not multiplied by 40%. This is because the
expense would have been $5,011.20, and since we cannot depreciate the asset below the estimated salvage
value of $10,000, the expense cannot exceed $2,528, which is the amount left to depreciate (difference
between the book value of $12,528 and the salvage value of $10,000). Since the asset has been depreciated to
its salvage value at the end of year four, no depreciation can be taken in year five.
In our example, the first year’s double-declining-balance depreciation expense would be $58,000 × 40%, or
$23,200. For the remaining years, the double-declining percentage is multiplied by the remaining book value of
the asset. Kenzie would continue to depreciate the asset until the book value and the estimated salvage value

716

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

are the same (in this case $10,000).
The net effect of the differences in straight-line depreciation versus double-declining-balance depreciation is
that under the double-declining-balance method, the allowable depreciation expenses are greater in the
earlier years than those allowed for straight-line depreciation. However, over the depreciable life of the asset,
the total depreciation expense taken will be the same, no matter which method the entity chooses. For
example, in the current example both straight-line and double-declining-balance depreciation will provide a
total depreciation expense of $48,000 over its five-year depreciable life.

IFRS CONNECTION
Accounting for Depreciation
Both US GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) account for long-term assets
(tangible and intangible) by recording the asset at the cost necessary to make the asset ready for its
intended use. Additionally, both sets of standards require that the cost of the asset be recognized over
the economic, useful, or legal life of the asset through an allocation process such as depreciation.
However, there are some significant differences in how the allocation process is used as well as how the
assets are carried on the balance sheet.
IFRS and US GAAP allow companies to choose between different methods of depreciation, such as even
allocation (straight-line method), depreciation based on usage (production methods), or an accelerated
method (double-declining balance). The mechanics of applying these methods do not differ between the
two standards. However, IFRS requires companies to use “component depreciation” if it is feasible.
Component depreciation would apply to assets with components that have differing lives. Consider the
following example using a plane owned by Southwest Airlines. Let’s divide this plane into three
components: the interior, the engines, and the fuselage. Suppose the average life of the interior of a
plane is ten years, the average life of the engines is fifteen years, and the average life of the fuselage is
twenty-five years. Given this, what should be the depreciable life of the asset? In that case, under IFRS,
the costs associated with the interior would be depreciated over ten years, the costs associated with the
engines would be depreciated over fifteen years, and the costs associated with the fuselage would be
depreciated over twenty-five years. Under US GAAP, the total cost of the airplane would likely be
depreciated over twenty years. Obviously, component depreciation involves more record keeping and
differing amounts of depreciation per year for the life of the asset. But the same amount of total
depreciation, the cost of the asset less residual value, would be taken over the life of the asset under
both US GAAP and IFRS.
Probably one of the most significant differences between IFRS and US GAAP affects long-lived assets.
This is the ability, under IFRS, to adjust the value of those assets to their fair value as of the balance sheet
date. The adjustment to fair value is to be done by “class” of asset, such as real estate, for example. A
company can adjust some classes of assets to fair value but not others. Under US GAAP, almost all longlived assets are carried on the balance sheet at their depreciated historical cost, regardless of how the
actual fair value of the asset changes. Consider the following example. Suppose your company owns a
single building that you bought for $1,000,000. That building currently has $200,000 in accumulated
depreciation. This building now has a book value of $800,000. Under US GAAP, this is how this building

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

717

would appear in the balance sheet. Even if the fair value of the building is $875,000, the building would
still appear on the balance sheet at its depreciated historical cost of $800,000 under US GAAP.
Alternatively, if the company used IFRS and elected to carry real estate on the balance sheet at fair value,
the building would appear on the company’s balance sheet at its new fair value of $875,000.
It is difficult to determine an accurate fair value for long-lived assets. This is one reason US GAAP has not
permitted the fair valuing of long-lived assets. Different appraisals can result in different determinations
of “fair value.” Thus, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) elected to continue with the
current method of carrying assets at their depreciated historical cost. The thought process behind the
adjustments to fair value under IFRS is that fair value more accurately represents true value. Even if the
fair value reported is not known with certainty, reporting the class of assets at a reasonable
representation of fair value enhances decision-making by users of the financial statements.

Summary of Depreciation
Table 11.2 compares the three methods discussed. Note that although each time-based (straight-line and
double-declining balance) annual depreciation expense is different, after five years the total amount
depreciated (accumulated depreciation) is the same. This occurs because at the end of the asset’s useful life, it
was expected to be worth $10,000: thus, both methods depreciated the asset’s value by $48,000 over that time
period.
The sum-of-the-years-digits is different from the two above methods in that while those methods are based on
time factors, the sum-of-the-years-digits is based on usage. However, the total amount of depreciation taken
over an asset’s economic life will still be the same. In our example, the total depreciation will be $48,000, even
though the sum-of-the-years-digits method could take only two or three years or possibly six or seven years to
be allocated.
Calculation of Depreciation Expense
Depreciation

Calculation

Method
Straight line

(Cost – salvage value)/Useful life

Units of production

(Cost – salvage value) × (Units produced in current period/Estimated total units to
be produced)

Double declining
balance
Table 11.2

Book value × Straight-line annual depreciation percentage × 2

718

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Depreciation Analysis Requires Careful Evaluation
When analyzing depreciation, accountants are required to make a supportable estimate of an asset’s
useful life and its salvage value. However, “management teams typically fail to invest either time or
attention into making or periodically revisiting and revising reasonably supportable estimates of asset
lives or salvage values, or the selection of depreciation methods, as prescribed by GAAP.”

[7]

This failure is

not an ethical approach to properly accounting for the use of assets.
Accountants need to analyze depreciation of an asset over the entire useful life of the asset. As an asset
supports the cash flow of the organization, expensing its cost needs to be allocated, not just recorded as
an arbitrary calculation. An asset’s depreciation may change over its life according to its use. If asset
depreciation is arbitrarily determined, the recorded “gains or losses on the disposition of depreciable
property assets seen in financial statements”

[8]

are not true best estimates. Due to operational changes,

the depreciation expense needs to be periodically reevaluated and adjusted.
Any mischaracterization of asset usage is not proper GAAP and is not proper accrual accounting.
Therefore, “financial statement preparers, as well as their accountants and auditors, should pay more
attention to the quality of depreciation-related estimates and their possible mischaracterization and
losses of credits and charges to operations as disposal gains.”

[9]

An accountant should always follow

GAAP guidelines and allocate the expense of an asset according to its usage.

Partial-Year Depreciation
A company will usually only own depreciable assets for a portion of a year in the year of purchase or disposal.
Companies must be consistent in how they record depreciation for assets owned for a partial year. A common
method is to allocate depreciation expense based on the number of months the asset is owned in a year. For
example, a company purchases an asset with a total cost of $58,000, a five-year useful life, and a salvage value
of $10,000. The annual depreciation is $9,600 ([$58,000 – 10,000]/5). However, the asset is purchased at the

7 Howard B. Levy. “Depreciable Asset Lives.” The CPA Journal. September 2016. https://www.cpajournal.com/2016/09/08/depreciable-assetlives/
8 Howard B. Levy. “Depreciable Asset Lives.” The CPA Journal. September 2016. https://www.cpajournal.com/2016/09/08/depreciable-assetlives/
9 Howard B. Levy. “Depreciable Asset Lives.” The CPA Journal. September 2016. https://www.cpajournal.com/2016/09/08/depreciable-assetlives/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

719

beginning of the fourth month of the fiscal year. The company will own the asset for nine months of the first
year. The depreciation expense of the first year is $7,200 ($9,600 × 9/12). The company will depreciate the asset
$9,600 for the next four years, but only $2,400 in the sixth year so that the total depreciation of the asset over
its useful life is the depreciable amount of $48,000 ($7,200 + 9,600 + 9,600 + 9,600 + 9,600 + 2,400).

THINK IT THROUGH
Choosing Appropriate Depreciation Methods
You are part of a team reviewing the financial statements of a new computer company. Looking over the
fixed assets accounts, one long-term tangible asset sticks out. It is labeled “USB” and valued at $10,000.
You ask the company’s accountant for more detail, and he explains that the asset is a USB drive that
holds the original coding for a game the company developed during the year. The company expects the
game to be fairly popular for the next few years, and then sales are expected to trail off. Because of this,
they are planning on depreciating this asset over the next five years using the double-declining method.
Does this recording seem appropriate, or is there a better way to categorize the asset? How should this
asset be expensed over time?

Special Issues in Depreciation
While you’ve now learned thebasic foundationof the major available depreciation methods, there are a few
special issues. Until now, we have assumed a definite physical or economically functional useful life for the
depreciable assets. However, in some situations, depreciable assets can be used beyond their useful life. If so
desired, the company could continue to use the asset beyond the original estimated economic life. In this case,
a new remaining depreciation expense would be calculated based on the remaining depreciable base and
estimated remaining economic life.
Assume in the earlier Kenzie example that after five years and $48,000 in accumulated depreciation, the
company estimated that it could use the asset for two more years, at which point the salvage value would be
$0. The company would be able to take an additional $10,000 in depreciation over the extended two-year
period, or $5,000 a year, using the straight-line method.
As with the straight-line example, the asset could be used for more than five years, with depreciation
recalculated at the end of year five using the double-declining balance method. While the process of
calculating the additional depreciation for the double-declining-balance method would differ from that of the
straight-line method, it would also allow the company to take an additional $10,000 after year five, as with the
other methods, so long as the cost of $58,000 is not exceeded.
As a side note, there often is a difference in useful lives for assets when following GAAP versus the guidelines
for depreciation under federal tax law, as enforced by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). This difference is not
unexpected when you consider that tax law is typically determined by the United States Congress, and there
often is an economic reason for tax policy.
For example, if we want to increase investment in real estate, shortening the economic lives of real estate for
taxation calculations can have a positive increasing effect on new construction. If we want to slow down new
production, extending the economic life can have the desired slowing effect. In this course, we concentrate on

720

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

financial accounting depreciation principles rather than tax depreciation.

Fundamentals of Depletion of Natural Resources
Another type of fixed asset is natural resources, assets a company owns that are consumed when used.
Examples include lumber, mineral deposits, and oil/gas fields. These assets are considered natural resources
while they are still part of the land; as they are extracted from the land and converted into products, they are
then accounted for as inventory (raw materials). Natural resources are recorded on the company’s books like a
fixed asset, at cost, with total costs including all expenses to acquire and prepare the resource for its intended
use.
As the resource is consumed (converted to a product), the cost of the asset must be expensed: this process is
called depletion. As with depreciation of nonnatural resource assets, a contra account called accumulated
depletion, which records the total depletion expense for a natural resource over its life, offsets the natural
resource asset account. Depletion expense is typically calculated based on the number of units extracted from
cutting, mining, or pumping the resource from the land, similar to the units-of-production method. For
example, assume a company has an oil well with an estimated 10,000 gallons of crude oil. The company
purchased this well for $1,000,000, and the well is expected to have no salvage value once it is pumped dry.
The depletion cost per gallon will be $1,000,000/10,000 = $100. If the company extracts 4,000 gallons of oil in a
given year, the depletion expense will be $400,000.

Fundamentals of Amortization of an Intangible
Recall that intangible assets are recorded as long-term assets at their cost. As with tangible assets, many
intangible assets have a finite (limited) life span so their costs must be allocated over their useful lives: this
process is amortization. Depreciation and amortization are similar in nature but have some important
differences. First, amortization is typically only done using the straight-line method. Second, there is usually no
salvage value for intangible assets because they are completely used up over their life span. Finally, an
accumulated amortization account is not required to record yearly expenses (as is needed with depreciation);
instead, the intangible asset account is written down each period.
For example, a company called Patents-R-Us purchased a product patent for $10,000, granting the company
exclusive use of that product for the next twenty years. Therefore, unless the company does not think the
product will be useful for all twenty years (at that point the company would use the shorter useful life of the
product), the company will record amortization expense of $500 a year ($10,000/20 years). Assuming that it
was placed into service on October 1, 2019, the journal entry would be as follows:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

721

LINK TO LEARNING
See Form 10-K that was filed with the SEC (https://openstax.org/l/50McDForm10K) to determine which
depreciation method McDonald’s Corporation used for its long-term assets in 2017.

11.4

Describe Accounting for Intangible Assets and Record Related

Transactions
Intangible assets can be difficult to understand and incorporate into the decision-making process. In this
section we explain them in more detail and provide examples of how to amortize each type of intangible asset.

Fundamentals of Intangible Assets
Intangibles are recorded at their acquisition cost, as are tangible assets. The costs of internally generated
intangible assets, such as a patent developed through research and development, are recorded as expenses
when incurred. An exception is legal costs to register or defend an intangible asset. For example, if a company
incurs legal costs to defend a patent it has developed internally, the costs associated with developing the
patent are recorded as an expense, but the legal costs associated with defending the patent would be
capitalized as a patent intangible asset.
Amortization of intangible assets is handled differently than depreciation of tangible assets. Intangible assets
are typically amortized using the straight-line method; there is typically no salvage value, as the usefulness of
the asset is used up over its lifetime, and no accumulated amortization account is needed. Additionally, based
on regulations, certain intangible assets are restricted and given limited life spans, while others are infinite in
their economic life and not amortized.

Copyrights
While copyrights have a finite life span of 70 years beyond the author’s death, they are amortized over their
estimated useful life. Therefore, if a company acquired a copyright on a new graphic novel for $10,000 and
estimated it would be able to sell that graphic novel for the next ten years, it would amortize $1,000 a year
($10,000/ten years), and the journal entry would be as shown. Assume that the novel began sales on January 1,
2019.

Patents
Patents are issued to the inventor of the product by the federal government and last twenty years. All costs

722

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

associated with creating the product being patented (such as research and development costs) are expensed;
however, direct costs to obtain the patent could be capitalized. Otherwise, patents are capitalized only when
purchased. Like copyrights, patents are amortized over their useful life, which can be shorter than twenty
years due to changing technology. Assume Mech Tech purchased the patent for a new pump system. The
patent cost $20,000, and the company expects the pump to be a useful product for the next twenty years.
Mech Tech will then amortize the $20,000 over the next twenty years, which is $1,000 a year.

Trademarks
Companies can register their trademarks with the federal government for ten years with the opportunity to
renew the trademark every ten years. Trademarks are recorded as assets only when they are purchased from
another company and are valued based on market price at the time of purchase. In this case, these
trademarks are amortized over the expected useful life. In some cases, the trademark may be seen as having
an indefinite life, in which case there would be no amortization.

Goodwill
From an accounting standpoint, goodwill is internally generated and is not recorded as an asset unless it is
purchased during the acquisition of another company. The purchase of goodwill occurs when one company
buys another company for an amount greater than the total value of the company’s net assets. The value
difference between net assets and the purchase price is then recorded as goodwill on the purchaser’s financial
statements. For example, say the London Hoops professional basketball team was sold for $10 million. The
new owner received net assets of $7 million, so the goodwill (value of the London Hoops above its net assets)
is $3 million. The following journal entry shows how the new owner would record this purchase.

Goodwill does not have an expected life span and therefore is not amortized. However, a company is required
to compare the book value of goodwill to its market value at least annually to determine if it needs to be
adjusted. This comparison process is called testing for impairment. If the market value of goodwill is found to
be lower than the book value, then goodwill needs to be reduced to its market value. If goodwill is impaired, it
is reduced with a credit, and an impairment loss is debited. Goodwill is never increased beyond its original
cost. For example, if the new owner of London Hoops assesses that London Hoops now has a fair value of
$9,000,000 rather than the $10,000,000 of the original purchase, the owner would need to record the
impairment as shown in the following journal entry.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

723

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Microsoft’s Goodwill
In 2016, Microsoft bought LinkedIn for $25 billion. Microsoft wanted the brand, website platform, and
software, which are intangible assets of LinkedIn, and therefore Microsoft only received $4 billion in net
assets. The overpayment by Microsoft is not necessarily a bad business decision, but rather the premium
or value of those intangible assets that LinkedIn owned and Microsoft wanted. The $21 billion difference
will be listed on Microsoft’s balance sheet as goodwill.

LINK TO LEARNING
Apple Inc. had goodwill of $5,717,000,000 on its 2017 balance sheet. Explore Apple, Inc.’s U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission 10-K Filing (https://openstax.org/l/50AppleForm10K) for notes that discuss
goodwill and whether Apple has had to adjust for the impairment of this asset in recent years.

11.5

Describe Some Special Issues in Accounting for Long-Term Assets

A company will account for some events for long-term assets that are less routine than recording purchase
and depreciation or amortization. For example, a company may realize that its original estimate of useful life
or salvage value is no longer accurate. A long-term asset may lose its value, or a company may sell a long-term
asset.

Revision of Remaining Life or Salvage Value
As you have learned, depreciation is based on estimating both the useful life of an asset and the salvage value
of that asset. Over time, these estimates may be proven inaccurate and need to be adjusted based on new
information. When this occurs, the depreciation expense calculation should be changed to reflect the new
(more accurate) estimates. For this entry, the remaining depreciable balance of the net book value is allocated
over the new useful life of the asset. To work through this process with data, let’s return to the example of
Kenzie Company.
• Kenzie has a press worth $58,000.
• Its salvage value was originally estimated to be $10,000.
• Its economic life was originally estimated to be five years.

724

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

• Kenzie uses straight-line depreciation.
After three years, Kenzie determines that the estimated useful life would have been more accurately estimated
at eight years, and the salvage value at that time would be $6,000. The revised depreciation expense is
calculated as shown:

These revised calculations show that Kenzie should now be recording a depreciation of $4,640 per year for the
next five years.

YOUR TURN
Useful Life
Georgia-Pacific is a global company that employs a wide variety of property, plant, and equipment assets
in its production facilities. You work for Georgia-Pacific as an accountant in charge of the fixed assets
subsidiary ledger at a warehouse facility in Pennsylvania. You find out that the useful lives for the fork
trucks need to be adjusted. As an asset category, the trucks were bought at the same time and had
original useful lives of seven years. However, after depreciating them for two years, the company makes
improvements to the trucks that allow them to be used outdoors in what can be harsh winters. The
improvements also extend their useful lives by two additional years. What is the remaining useful life
after the improvements?
Solution
Seven original years – two years depreciated + two additional years = seven years remaining.

Obsolescence
Obsolescence refers to the reduction in value and/or use of the asset. Obsolescence has traditionally resulted
from the physical deterioration of the asset—called physical obsolescence. In current application—and
considering the role of modern technology and tech assets—accounting for functional obsolescence is
becoming more common. Functional obsolescence is the loss of value from all causes within a property
except those due to physical deterioration. With functional obsolescence, the useful life still needs to be
adjusted downward: although the asset physically still works, its functionality makes it less useful for the
company. Also, an adjustment might be necessary in the salvage value. This potential adjustment depends on
the specific details of each obsolescence determination or decision.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

725

Sale of an Asset
When an asset is sold, the company must account for its depreciation up to the date of sale. This means
companies may be required to record a depreciation entry before the sale of the asset to ensure it is current.
After ensuring that the net book value of an asset is current, the company must determine if the asset has sold
at a gain, at a loss, or at book value. We look at examples of each accounting alternative using the Kenzie
Company data.
Recall that Kenzie’s press has a depreciable base of $48,000 and an economic life of five years. If Kenzie sells
the press at the end of the third year, the company would have taken three years of depreciation amounting to
$28,800 ($9,600 × 3 years). With an original cost of $58,000, and after subtracting the accumulated depreciation
of $28,800, the press would have a book value of $29,200. If the company sells the press for $31,000, it would
realize a gain of $1,800, as shown.

The journal entry to record the sale is shown here.

If Kenzie sells the printing press for $27,100, what would the journal entries be? The book value of the press is
$29,200, so Kenzie would be selling the press at a loss. The journal entry to record the sale is shown here.

What if Kenzie sells the press at exactly book value? In this case, the company will realize neither a gain nor a
loss. Here is the journal entry to record the sale.

While it would be ideal to estimate a salvage value that provides neither a gain nor a loss upon the retirement
and sale of a long-term asset, this type of accuracy is virtually impossible to reach, unless you negotiate a fixed

726

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

future sales price. For example, you might buy a truck for $80,000 and lock in a five-year life with 100,000 or
fewer miles driven. Under these conditions, the dealer might agree to pay you $20,000 for the truck in five
years.
Under these conditions, you could justify calculating your depreciation over a five-year period, using a
depreciable base of $60,000. Under the straight-line method, this would provide an annual depreciation
amount of $12,000. Also, when you sell the truck to the dealer after five years, the sales price will be $20,000,
and the book value will be $20,000, so there would be neither a gain nor a loss on the sale.
In the Kenzie example where the asset was sold for $31,000 after three years, Kenzie should have recorded a
total of $27,000 in depreciation (cost of $58,000 less the sales value of $31,000). However, the company
recorded $28,800 in depreciation over the three-year period. Subtracting the gain of $1,800 from the total
depreciation expense of $28,800 shows the true cost of using the asset as $27,000, and not the depreciation
amount of $28,800.
When the asset was sold for $27,100, the accounting records would show $30,900 in depreciation (cost of
$58,000 less the sales price of $27,100). However, depreciation is listed as $28,800 over the three-year period.
Adding the loss of $2,100 to the total depreciation expense of $28,800 results in a cost of $30,900 for use of the
asset rather than the $28,800 depreciation.
If the asset sells for exactly the book value, its depreciation expense was estimated perfectly, and there is no
gain or loss. If it sells for $29,200 and had a book value of $29,200, its depreciation expense of $28,800 matches
the original estimate.

THINK IT THROUGH
Depreciation of Long-Term Assets
You are a new staff accountant at a large construction company. After a rough year, management is
seeking ways to minimize expenses or increase revenues before year-end to help increase the
company’s earnings per share. Your boss has asked staff to think “outside the box” and has asked to you
look through the list of long-term assets to find ones that have been fully depreciated in value but may
still have market value. Why would your manager be looking for these specific assets? How significantly
might these items impact your company’s overall performance? What ethical issues might come into
play in the task you have been assigned?

LINK TO LEARNING
The management of fixed assets can be quite a challenge for any business, from sole proprietorships to
global corporations. Not only do companies need to track their asset purchases, depreciation, sales,
disposals, and capital expenditures, they also need to be able to generate a variety of reports. Read this
Finances Online post for more details on software packages (https://openstax.org/l/50SoftwarePkg) that
help companies steward their fixed assets no matter what their size.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

727

Key Terms
accumulated depletion contra account that records the total depletion expense for a natural resource over
its life
accumulated depreciation contra account that records the total depreciation expense for a fixed asset over
its life
amortization allocation of the costs of intangible assets over their useful economic lives; also, process of
separating the principal and interest in loan payments over the life of a loan
capitalization process in which a long-term asset is recorded on the balance sheet and its allocated costs
are expensed on the income statement over the asset’s economic life
contra account account paired with another account type, has an opposite normal balance to the paired
account, and reduces the balance in the paired account at the end of a period
copyright exclusive rights to reproduce and sell an artistic, literary, or musical asset
current expense cost to the business that is charged in the current period
depletion expense associated with consuming a natural resource
depreciation process of allocating the costs of a tangible asset over the asset’s economic life
double-declining-balance depreciation method accelerated depreciation method that accounts for both
time and usage, so it takes more expense in the first few years of the asset’s life
fixed asset tangible long-term asset
functional obsolescence reduction of an asset’s value to the company, not including physical obsolescence
goodwill value of certain favorable factors that a business possesses that allows it to generate a greater rate
of return or profit; includes price paid for an acquired company above the fair value of its identifiable net
assets
intangible asset asset with financial value but no physical presence; examples include copyrights, patents,
goodwill, and trademarks
investment short-term and long-term asset that is not used in the day-to-day operations of the business
long-term asset asset used ongoing in the normal course of business for more than one year that is not
intended to be resold
natural resources assets a company owns that are consumed when used; they are typically taken out of the
earth
patent contract providing exclusive rights to produce and sell a unique product without competition for
twenty years
physical obsolescence reduction in the value of an asset to the company based on its physical deterioration
salvage (residual) value price that the asset will sell for or be worth as a trade-in when the useful life is over
straight-line depreciation depreciation method that evenly splits the depreciable amount across the useful
life of the asset
tangible asset asset that has physical substance
trademark exclusive right to a name, term, or symbol a company uses to identify itself or its products
units-of-production depreciation method depreciation method that considers the actual usage of the
asset to determine the depreciation expense
useful life time period over which an asset cost is allocated

Summary
11.1 Distinguish between Tangible and Intangible Assets

728

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

• Tangible assets are assets that have physical substance.
• Long-term tangible assets are assets used in the normal course of operation of businesses that last for
more than one year and are not intended to be resold.
• Examples of long-term tangible assets are land, building, and machinery.
• Intangible assets lack physical substance but often have value and legal rights and protections, and
therefore are still assets to the firm.
• Examples of intangible assets are patents, trademarks, copyrights, and goodwill.
11.2 Analyze and Classify Capitalized Costs versus Expenses
• Costs incurred to purchase an asset that will be used in the day-to-day operations of the business will be
capitalized and then depreciated over the useful life of that asset.
• Costs incurred to purchase an asset that will not be used in the day-to-day operations, but was purchased
for investment purposes, will be considered an investment asset.
• Investments are short term (can be converted to cash in one year) or long term (held for over a year).
• Costs incurred during the life of the asset are expensed right away if they do not extend the useful life of
that asset or are capitalized if they extend the asset’s useful life.
11.3 Explain and Apply Depreciation Methods to Allocate Capitalized Costs
• Fixed assets are recorded at the historical (initial) cost, including any costs to acquire the asset and get it
ready for use.
• Depreciation is the process of allocating the cost of using a long-term asset over its anticipated economic
(useful) life. To determine depreciation, one needs the fixed asset’s historical cost, salvage value, and
useful life (in years or units).
• There are three main methods to calculate depreciation: the straight-line method, units-of-production
method, and double-declining-balance method.
• Natural resources are tangible assets occurring in nature that a company owns, which are consumed
when used. Natural resources are depleted over the life of the asset, using a units-consumed method.
• Intangible assets are amortized over the life of the asset. Amortization is different from depreciation as
there is typically no salvage value, the straight-line method is typically used, and no accumulated
amortization account is required.
11.4 Describe Accounting for Intangible Assets and Record Related Transactions
• Intangible assets are expensed using amortization. This is similar to depreciation but is credited to the
intangible asset rather than to a contra account.
• Finite intangible assets are typically amortized using the straight-line method over the useful life of the
asset.
• Intangible assets with an indefinite life are not amortized but are assessed yearly for impairment.
11.5 Describe Some Special Issues in Accounting for Long-Term Assets
• Because estimates are used to calculate depreciation of fixed assets, sometimes adjustments may need to
be made to the asset’s useful life or to its salvage value.
• To make these adjustments, the asset’s net book value is updated, and then the adjustments are made
for the remaining years.
• Assets are sometimes sold before the end of their useful life. These sales can result in a gain, a loss, or
neither, depending on the cash received and the asset’s net book value.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

729

Multiple Choice
1.

11.1 Property, Plant, and Equipment is considered why type of asset?
A.

current assets

B.

contra assets

C.

tangible assets

D.

intangible assets

2.

11.1 Which of the following would not be considered an intangible asset?
A.

goodwill

B.

patent

C.

copyright

D.

inventory

3.

11.1 The legal protection that provides a company exclusive rights to produce and sell a unique product

is known as which of the following?
A.

trademark

B.

copyright

C.

patent

D.

goodwill

4.

11.2 Which of the following statements about capitalizing costs is correct?
A.

Capitalizing costs refers to the process of converting assets to expenses.

B.

Only the purchase price of the asset is capitalized.

C.

Capitalizing a cost means to record it as an asset.

D.

Capitalizing costs results in an immediate decrease in net income.

5.

11.2 Ngo Company purchased a truck for $54,000. Sales tax amounted to $5,400; shipping costs

amounted to $1,200; and one-year registration of the truck was $100. What is the total amount of costs that
should be capitalized?
A.

$60,600

B.

$66,100

C.

$54,000

D.

$59,400

6.

11.2 If a company capitalizes costs that should be expensed, how is its income statement for the current

period impacted?
A.

Assets understated

B.

Net Income understated

C.

Expenses understated

D.

Revenues understated

7.

11.3 Depreciation of a plant asset is the process of ________.
A.

asset valuation for statement of financial position purposes

B.

allocation of the asset’s cost to the periods of use

C.

fund accumulation for the replacement of the asset

D.

asset valuation based on current replacement cost data

730

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

8.

11.3 An accelerated depreciation method that takes more expense in the first few years of the asset’s life

is ________.
A.

units-of-production depreciation

B.

double-declining-balance depreciation

C.

accumulated depreciation

D.

straight-line depreciation

9.

11.3 The estimated economic life of an asset is also known as ________.
A.

residual value

B.

book value

C.

salvage life

D.

useful life

10.

11.4 The amortization process is like what other process?
A.

depreciation

B.

valuation

C.

recognizing revenue

D.

capitalization

11.

11.4 How are intangible assets with an indefinite life treated?
A.

They are depreciated.

B.

They are amortized.

C.

They are depleted.

D.

They are tested yearly for impairment.

12.

11.4 If the market value of goodwill is found to be lower than the book value, goodwill is __________ and

must be adjusted by __________.
A.

worthless; reducing it with a credit

B.

impaired; reducing it with a credit

C.

impaired; increasing it with a credit

D.

worthless; increasing it with a credit

13.

11.5 Which of the following represents an event that is less routine when accounting for long-term

assets?
A.

recording an asset purchase

B.

recording depreciation on an asset

C.

recording accumulated depreciation for an asset or asset category

D.

changing the estimated useful life of an asset

14.

11.5 Which of the following is true regarding special issues in accounting for long-term assets?
A.

An asset’s useful life can never be changed.

B.

An asset’s salvage value can never be changed.

C.

Depreciation expense calculations may need to be updated using new and more accurate estimates.

D.

Asset values are never reduced in value due to physical deterioration.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

15.

731

11.5 The loss in value from all causes within a property except those due to physical deterioration is

known as which of the following?
A.

functional obsolescence

B.

obsolescence

C.

true obsolescence

D.

deterioration

Questions
1.

11.1 What is the difference between tangible and intangible assets?

2.

11.1 Define intangible assets.

3.

11.1 What is the difference between a patent and a copyright?

4.

11.1 What is goodwill, and how is it generated?

5.

11.2 For each of the following transactions, state whether the cost would be capitalized (C) or recorded

as an expense (E).
A.

Purchased a machine, $100,000; gave long-term note

B.

Paid $600 for ordinary repairs

C.

Purchased a patent for $45,300 cash

D.

Paid $200,000 cash for addition to old building

E.

Paid $20,000 for monthly salaries

F.

Paid $250 for routine maintenance

G.

Paid $16,000 for major repairs

6.

11.2 What amounts should be recorded as a cost of a long-term asset?

7.

11.2 Describe the relationship between expense recognition and long-term assets.

8.

11.3 Define natural resources.

9.

11.3 Explain the difference between depreciation, depletion, and amortization.

10.

11.4 Explain the differences between the process of amortizing intangible assets and the process of

depreciating tangible assets.
11.

11.4 What is goodwill, and what are the unique aspects of accounting for it?

12.

11.5 What are some examples of special issues in accounting for long-term assets? How are they

handled?
13.

11.5 What is the difference between functional obsolescence and physical obsolescence?

732

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

Exercise Set A
EA1.

11.1 Fombell, Incorporated has the following assets in its trial balance:

What is the total balance of its Property, Plant, and Equipment?
EA2.

11.2 Jada Company had the following transactions during the year:
• Purchased a machine for $500,000 using a long-term note to finance it
• Paid $500 for ordinary repair
• Purchased a patent for $45,000 cash
• Paid $200,000 cash for addition to an existing building
• Paid $60,000 for monthly salaries
• Paid $250 for routine maintenance on equipment
• Paid $10,000 for extraordinary repairs

If all transactions were recorded properly, what amount did Jada capitalize for the year, and what amount did
Jada expense for the year?
EA3.

11.3 Montello Inc. purchases a delivery truck for $15,000. The truck has a salvage value of $3,000 and

is expected to be driven for eight years. Montello uses the straight-line depreciation method. Calculate the
annual depreciation expense.
EA4.

11.3 Montello Inc. purchases a delivery truck for $15,000. The truck has a salvage value of $3,000 and

is expected to be driven for 120,000 miles. Montello uses the units-of-production depreciation method and in
year one it expects to use the truck for 23,000 miles. Calculate the annual depreciation expense.
EA5.

11.3 Steele Corp. purchases equipment for $25,000. Regarding the purchase, Steele recorded the

following transactions:
• Paid shipping of $1,000
• Paid installation fees of $2,000
• Pays annual maintenance cost of $200
• Received a 5% discount on $25,000 sales price
Determine the acquisition cost of the equipment.
EA6.

11.3 Calico Inc. purchased a patent on a new drug. The patent cost $21,000. The patent has a life of

twenty years, but Calico only expects to be able to sell the drug for fifteen years. Calculate the amortization
expense and record the journal for the first-year expense.
EA7.

11.3 Alfredo Company purchased a new 3-D printer for $900,000. Although this printer is expected to

last for ten years, Alfredo knows the technology will become old quickly, and so they plan to replace this
printer in three years. At that point, Alfredo believes it will be able to sell the printer for $15,000. Calculate
yearly depreciation using the double-declining-balance method.
EA8.

11.3 Using the information from EA7, calculate depreciation using the straight-line method.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

EA9.

733

11.3 Santa Rosa recently purchased a new boat to help ship product overseas. The following

information is related to that purchase:
• Purchase price $4,500,000
• Cost to bring boat to production facility $25,000
• Yearly insurance cost $25,000
• Annual maintenance cost of $30,000
• Received 8% discount on sales price
Determine the acquisition cost of the boat, and record the journal entry needed.
EA10.

11.3 Warriors Productions recently purchased a copyright. Although the copyright is expected to last

a minimum of twenty-five years, the chief executive officer of the company believes this B-list movie will only
be useful for the next fifteen years. Calculate the amortization expense and record the journal for the first
year’s expense. The total cost of the copyright was $15,000.
EA11.
A.

11.4 The following intangible assets were purchased by Goldstein Corporation:
A patent with a remaining legal life of twelve years is bought, and Goldstein expects to be able to use it
for seven years.

B.

A copyright with a remaining life of thirty years is purchased, and Goldstein expects to be able to use it
for ten years.

For each of these situations, determine the useful life over which Goldstein will amortize the intangible assets.
EA12.

11.5 Sand River Sales has a fork truck used in its warehouse operations. The truck had an original

useful life of five years. However, after depreciating the asset for three years, the company makes a major
repair that extends the life by four years. What is the remaining useful life after the major repair?

B

EB1.

Exercise Set B
11.1 New Carlisle, Incorporated, has the following assets in its trial balance:

What is New Carlisle’s total amount of intangible assets?

734

EB2.

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

11.2 Johnson, Incorporated had the following transactions during the year:
• Purchased a building for $5,000,000 using a mortgage for financing
• Paid $2,000 for ordinary repair on a piece of equipment
• Sold product on account to customers for $1,500,600
• Purchased a copyright for $5,000 cash
• Paid $20,000 cash to add a storage shed in the corner of an existing building
• Paid $360,000 in monthly salaries
• Paid $25,000 for routine maintenance on equipment
• Paid $110,000 for major repairs

If all transactions were recorded properly, what amount did Johnson capitalize for the year, and what amount
did Johnson expense for the year?
EB3.

11.3 Montello Inc. purchases a delivery truck for $25,000. The truck has a salvage value of $6,000 and

is expected to be driven for ten years. Montello uses the straight-line depreciation method. Calculate the
annual depreciation expense.
EB4.

11.3 Montello Inc. purchases a delivery truck for $25,000. The truck has a salvage value of $6,000 and

is expected to be driven for 125,000 miles. Montello uses the units-of-production depreciation method, and in
year one it expects to use the truck for 26,000 miles. Calculate the annual depreciation expense.
EB5.

11.3 Steele Corp. purchases equipment for $30,000. Regarding the purchase, Steele
• paid shipping of $1,200,
• paid installation fees of $2,750,
• pays annual maintenance cost of $250, and
• received a 10% discount on sales price.

Determine the acquisition cost of the equipment.
EB6.

11.3 Calico Inc. purchased a patent on a new drug it created. The patent cost $12,000. The patent has a

life of twenty years, but Calico expects to be able to sell the drug for fifty years. Calculate the amortization
expense and record the journal for the first year’s expense.
EB7.

11.3 Kenzie purchased a new 3-D printer for $450,000. Although this printer is expected to last for ten

years, Kenzie knows the technology will become old quickly and so she plans to replace this printer in three
years. At that point, Kenzie believes she will be able to sell the printer for $30,000. Calculate yearly depreciation
using the double-declining-balance method.
EB8.

11.3 Using the information from EB7, calculate depreciation using the straight-line method.

EB9.

11.3 Ronson recently purchased a new boat to help ship product overseas. The following information

is related to that purchase:
• purchase price $4,500,000
• cost to bring boat to production facility $15,000
• yearly insurance cost $12,000
• pays annual maintenance cost of $22,000
• received a 10% discount on sales price
Determine the acquisition cost of the boat and record the journal entry needed.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

EB10.

735

11.3 Warriors Production recently purchased a copyright on its new film. Although the copyright is

expected to last a minimum of twenty-five years, the chief executive officer of the company believes this B-list
movie will only be useful for the next five years. Calculate the amortization expense and record the journal for
the first-year expense. The total cost of the copyright was $23,500.
EB11.
A.

11.4 The following intangible assets were purchased by Hanna Unlimited:
A patent with a remaining legal life of twelve years is bought, and Hanna expects to be able to use it for
six years. It is purchased at a cost of $48,000.

B.

A copyright with a remaining life of thirty years is purchased, and Hanna expects to be able to use it for
ten years. It is purchased for $70,000.

Determine the annual amortization amount for each intangible asset.
EB12.

11.5 Baglia’s Wholesale Trinkets has a 3-D printer used in operations. The original useful life was

estimated to be six years. However, after two years of use, the printer was overhauled, and its total useful life
was extended to eight years. How many years of depreciation remain after the overhaul in year 2?

Problem Set A
PA1.

11.1 Selected accounts from Phipps Corporation’s trial balance are as follows. Prepare the assets

section of the company’s balance sheet.

736

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

PA2.

11.1 Selected accounts from Han Corporation’s trial balance are as follows. Prepare the detailed

schedule showing the Property, Plant, and Equipment.

PA3.

11.2 During the current year, Alanna Co. had the following transactions pertaining to its new office

building.

A.

What should Alanna Co. record on its books for the land? The total cost of land includes all costs of
preparing the land for use. The demolition cost of the old building is added to the land costs, and the
sale of the old building scrap is subtracted from the land cost.

B.
PA4.

What should Alanna Co. record on its books for the building?
11.2 During the current year, Arkells Inc. made the following expenditures relating to plant machinery.

• Renovated five machines for $100,000 to improve efficiency in production of their remaining useful life
of five years
• Low-cost repairs throughout the year totaled $70,000
• Replaced a broken gear on a machine for $10,000
A.

What amount should be expensed during the period?

B.

What amount should be capitalized during the period?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

PA5.

737

11.2 Jada Company had the following transactions during the year:
• Purchased a machine for $500,000 using a long-term note to finance it
• Paid $500 for ordinary repair
• Purchased a patent for $45,000 cash
• Paid $200,000 cash for addition to an existing building
• Paid $60,000 for monthly salaries
• Paid $250 for routine maintenance on equipment
• Paid $10,000 for major repairs
• Depreciation expense recorded for the year is $25,000

If all transactions were recorded properly, what is the amount of increase to the Property, Plant, and
Equipment section of Jada’s balance sheet resulting from this year’s transactions? What amount did Jada
report on the income statement for expenses for the year?
PA6.

11.3 Gimli Miners recently purchased the rights to a diamond mine. It is estimated that there are one

million tons of ore within the mine. Gimli paid $23,100,000 for the rights and expects to harvest the ore over
the next ten years. The following is the expected extraction for the next five years.
• Year 1: 50,000 tons
• Year 2: 90,000 tons
• Year 3: 100,000 tons
• Year 4: 110,000 tons
• Year 5: 130,000 tons
Calculate the depletion expense for the next five years, and create the journal entry for year one.
PA7.

11.3 Tree Lovers Inc. purchased 100 acres of woodland in which the company intends to harvest the

complete forest, leaving the land barren and worthless. Tree Lovers paid $2,100,000 for the land. Tree Lovers
will sell the lumber as it is harvested and expects to deplete it over five years (twenty acres in year one, thirty
acres in year two, twenty-five acres in year three, fifteen acres in year four, and ten acres in year five).
Calculate the depletion expense for the next five years and create the journal entry for year one.
PA8.

11.3 Referring to PA7 where Kenzie Company purchased a 3-D printer for $450,000, consider how the

purchase of the printer impacts not only depreciation expense each year but also the asset’s book value. What
amount will be recorded as depreciation expense each year, and what will the book value be at the end of each
year after depreciation is recorded?
PA9.

11.4 For each of the following unrelated situations, calculate the annual amortization expense and

prepare a journal entry to record the expense:
A.

A patent with a ten-year remaining legal life was purchased for $300,000. The patent will be usable for
another eight years.

B.

A patent was acquired on a new smartphone. The cost of the patent itself was only $24,000, but the
market value of the patent is $600,000. The company expects to be able to use this patent for all twenty
years of its life.

PA10.

11.4 Buchanan Imports purchased McLaren Corporation for $5,000,000 cash when McLaren had net

assets worth $4,500,000.
A.

What is the amount of goodwill in this transaction?

B.

What is Buchanan’s journal entry to record the purchase of McLaren?

C.

What journal entry should Buchanan write when the company internally generates additional goodwill
in the year following the purchase of McLaren?

738

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

PA11.

11.5 Montezuma Inc. purchases a delivery truck for $15,000. The truck has a salvage value of $3,000

and is expected to be driven for eight years. Montezuma uses the straight-line depreciation method. Calculate
the annual depreciation expense. After three years of recording depreciation, Montezuma determines that the
delivery truck will only be useful for another three years and that the salvage value will increase to $4,000.
Determine the depreciation expense for the final three years of the asset’s life, and create the journal entry for
year four.
PA12.

11.5 Garcia Co. owns equipment that costs $76,800, with accumulated depreciation of $40,800. Garcia

sells the equipment for cash. Record the journal entry for the sale of the equipment if Garcia were to sell the
equipment for the following amounts:
A.

$47,000 cash

B.

$36,000 cash

C.

$31,000 cash

PA13.

11.5 Colquhoun International purchases a warehouse for $300,000. The best estimate of the salvage

value at the time of purchase was $15,000, and it is expected to be used for twenty-five years. Colquhoun uses
the straight-line depreciation method for all warehouse buildings. After four years of recording depreciation,
Colquhoun determines that the warehouse will be useful for only another fifteen years. Calculate annual
depreciation expense for the first four years. Determine the depreciation expense for the final fifteen years of
the asset’s life, and create the journal entry for year five.

B

PB1.

Problem Set B
11.1 Selected accounts from Hanna Corporation’s trial balance are as follows. Prepare the assets

section of the company’s balance sheet.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

PB2.

739

11.1 Selected accounts from Boxwood Corporation’s trial balance are as follows. Prepare the detailed

schedule showing the Property, Plant, and Equipment.

PB3.

11.2 During the current year, Alanna Co. had the following transactions pertaining to its new office

building.

A.

What should Alanna Co. record on its books for the land? The total cost of land includes all costs of
preparing the land for use. The demolition cost of the old building is added to the land costs, and the
sale of the old building scrap is subtracted from the land cost.

B.
PB4.

What should Alanna Co. record on its books for the building?
11.2 During the current year, Arkells Inc. made the following expenditures relating to plant machinery.

• Renovated seven machines for $250,000 to improve efficiency in production of their remaining useful
life of eight years
• Low-cost repairs throughout the year totaled $79,000
• Replaced a broken gear on a machine for $6,000
A.

What amount should be expensed during the period?

B.

What amount should be capitalized during the period?

740

PB5.

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

11.2 Johnson, Incorporated, had the following transactions during the year:
• Purchased a building for $5,000,000 using a mortgage for financing
• Paid $2,000 for ordinary repair on a piece of equipment
• Sold product on account to customers for $1,500,600
• Paid $20,000 cash to add a storage shed in the corner of an existing building
• Paid $360,000 in monthly salaries
• Paid $25,000 for routine maintenance on equipment
• Paid $110,000 for extraordinary repairs
• Depreciation expense recorded for the year is $15,000.

If all transactions were recorded properly, what is the amount of increase to the Property, Plant, and
Equipment section of Johnson’s balance sheet resulting from this year’s transactions? What amount did
Johnson report on the income statement for expenses for the year?
PB6.

11.3 Underwood’s Miners recently purchased the rights to a diamond mine. It is estimated that there

are two million tons of ore within the mine. Underwood’s paid $46,000,000 for the rights and expects to
harvest the ore over the next fifteen years. The following is the expected extraction for the next five years.
• Year 1: 50,000 tons
• Year 2: 900,000 tons
• Year 3: 400,000 tons
• Year 4: 210,000 tons
• Year 5: 150,000 tons
Calculate the depletion expense for the next five years and create the journal entry for year one.
PB7.

11.3 Tree Lovers Inc. purchased 2,500 acres of woodland in which it intends to harvest the complete

forest, leaving the land barren and worthless. Tree Lovers paid $5,000,000 for the land. Tree Lovers will sell the
lumber as it is harvested and it expects to deplete it over ten years (150 acres in year one, 300 acres in year
two, 250 acres in year three, 150 acres in year four, and 100 acres in year five). Calculate the depletion expense
for the next five years and create the journal entry for year one.
PB8.

11.3 Montello Inc. purchases a delivery truck for $25,000. The truck has a salvage value of $6,000 and

is expected to be driven for 125,000 miles. Montello uses the units-of-production depreciation method, and in
year one the company expects the truck to be driven for 26,000 miles; in year two, 30,000 miles; and in year
three, 40,000 miles. Consider how the purchase of the truck will impact Montello’s depreciation expense each
year and what the truck’s book value will be each year after depreciation expense is recorded.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

PB9.

741

13.4 Prepare the assets section of the balance sheet as of December 31 for Hooper’s International

using the following information:

PB10.

11.4 For each of the following unrelated situations, calculate the annual amortization expense and

prepare a journal entry to record the expense:
A.

A patent with a seventeen-year remaining legal life was purchased for $850,000. The patent will be
usable for another six years.

B.

A patent was acquired on a new tablet. The cost of the patent itself was only $12,000, but the market
value of the patent is $150,000. The company expects to be able to use this patent for all twenty years
of its life.

PB11.

11.4 On May 1, 2015, Zoe Inc. purchased Branta Corp. for $15,000,000 in cash. They only received

$12,000,000 in net assets. In 2016, the market value of the goodwill obtained from Branta Corp. was valued at
$4,000,000, but in 2017 it dropped to $2,000,000. Prepare the journal entry for the creation of goodwill and the
entry to record any impairments to it in subsequent years.
PB12.

11.4 Farm Fresh Agriculture Company purchased Sunny Side Egg Distribution for $400,000 cash when

Sunny Side had net assets worth $390,000.
A.

What is the amount of goodwill in this transaction?

B.

What is Farm Fresh Agriculture Company’s journal entry to record the purchase of Sunny Side Egg
Distribution?

C.

What journal entry should Farm Fresh Agriculture Company write when the company tests for
impairment and determines that goodwill is worth $1,000 in the year following the purchase of Sunny
Side?

PB13.

11.5 Montezuma Inc. purchases a delivery truck for $20,000. The truck has a salvage value of $8,000

and is expected to be driven for ten years. Montezuma uses the straight-line depreciation method. Calculate
the annual depreciation expense. After five years of recording depreciation, Montezuma determines that the
delivery truck will be useful for another five years (ten years in total, as originally expected) and that the
salvage value will increase to $10,000. Determine the depreciation expense for the final five years of the
asset’s life, and create the journal entry for years 6–10 (the entry will be the same for each of the five years).

742

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

PB14.

11.5 Garcia Co. owns equipment that costs $150,000, with accumulated depreciation of $65,000.

Garcia sells the equipment for cash. Record the journal entry for the sale of the equipment if Garcia were to
sell the equipment for the following amounts:
A.

$90,000 cash

B.

$85,000 cash

C.

$80,000 cash

PB15.

11.5 Urquhart Global purchases a building to house its administrative offices for $500,000. The best

estimate of the salvage value at the time of purchase was $45,000, and it is expected to be used for forty years.
Urquhart uses the straight-line depreciation method for all buildings. After ten years of recording
depreciation, Urquhart determines that the building will be useful for a total of fifty years instead of forty.
Calculate annual depreciation expense for the first ten years. Determine the depreciation expense for the final
forty years of the asset’s life, and create the journal entry for year eleven.

Thought Provokers
TP1.

11.1 You are an accounting student at your local university. Your brother has recently managed to

save $5,000, and he would like to invest some of this money in the stock market, so he’s researching various
global corporations that are listed on the stock exchange. He is reviewing a company that has “Goodwill” as an
item on the balance sheet. He is quite perplexed about what this means, so he asks you for help, knowing that
you are taking accounting classes. How would you explain the concept of goodwill to him by comparing it to
other types of resources the company has available?
TP2.

11.2 Speedy delivery service recently hired a new accountant who discovered that the prior accountant

had erroneously capitalized routine repair and maintenance costs on delivery trucks. The costs were added to
the overall trucks’ book values and depreciated over time. How should Speedy have recorded routine
maintenance and repair costs? What effect did the error have on Speedy’s balance sheet and income
statement?
TP3.

11.3 Speedy Delivery has a very lazy accountant. When originally setting up the delivery trucks into the

accounting system, the accountant did not want to calculate the expected salvage value for each vehicle. He
left salvage value at $0 even though this is not the case. Explain what leaving the salvage value at $0 would do
for depreciation. Discuss the differences, if any, between straight-line, double-declining, and units-ofproduction methods.
TP4.

11.4 Malone Industries has been in business for five years and has been very successful. In the past

year, it expanded operations by buying Hot Metal Manufacturing for a price greater than the value of the net
assets purchased. In the past year, the customer base has expanded much more than expected, and the
company’s owners want to increase the goodwill account. Your CPA firm has been hired to help Malone
prepare year-end financial statements, and your boss has asked you to talk to Malone’s managers about
goodwill and whether an adjustment can be made to the goodwill account. How do you respond to the owners
and managers?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

TP5.

743

11.5 Your family started a new manufacturing business making outdoor benches for use in parks and

outdoor venues two years ago. The business has been very successful, and sales are soaring. Because of this
success, your family realizes that the equipment purchased to start the business will not last as long as
expected because the company has needed to run twenty-four-hour production shifts for most of the past
year. There has been a lot of wear and tear on the equipment. The original useful lives and salvage values are
not as accurate as your family had hoped. Your aunt, who is the production manager for the family business,
has approached you because she is concerned about this issue, and she knows you have had an accounting
class. What advice do you have for her? How should the company readjust given the realities of the last few
years?

744

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 11 Long-Term Assets

12

Current Liabilities
Figure 12.1 Summer Eatery. Proper management of short-term obligations can lead to long-term business
success. (credit: modification of “Hands Holding Plate” by unknown/Pixabay, CC0)

Chapter Outline
12.1 Identify and Describe Current Liabilities
12.2 Analyze, Journalize, and Report Current Liabilities
12.3 Define and Apply Accounting Treatment for Contingent Liabilities
12.4 Prepare Journal Entries to Record Short-Term Notes Payable
12.5 Record Transactions Incurred in Preparing Payroll

Why It Matters
Willow knew from a young age that she had a future in food. She has just transformed her passion into a
thriving business venture as the owner of a small restaurant called Summer Eatery.
To grow her business, Willow has decided to provide both restaurant dining and catering services. When
Summer Eatery accepts catering orders, it requires a client deposit equal to 50% of the total order. Since
Summer Eatery has not yet provided the catering services at the time of deposit, the deposit amount is
recognized as unearned revenue. Once the catering services have been provided, this liability to the client is
reclassified as revenue for the restaurant.
The catering service is a success, and Summer Eatery’s income increases twofold. The increase in business has
allowed Willow to form a strong relationship with her vendors (suppliers). Because of this relationship, some
suppliers will deliver the food and equipment she needs and allow the restaurant to defer payment until a
later date. This helps Summer Eatery because it does not yet have enough cash on hand to pay for the food
and equipment. Rather than incur more debt, or have to delay ordering, this arrangement allows Willow to

746

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

grow and still meet her current obligations.
It takes more than an idea to make a business grow, and Willow will continue to experience the ebb and flow
of running a restaurant and catering service. Her management of short-term obligations will be one of the
keys to Summer Eatery’s future success.

12.1

Identify and Describe Current Liabilities

To assist in understanding current liabilities, assume that you own a landscaping company that provides
landscaping maintenance services to clients. As is common for landscaping companies in your area, you
require clients to pay an initial deposit of 25% for services before you begin working on their property. Asking
a customer to pay for services before you have provided them creates a current liability transaction for your
business. As you’ve learned, liabilities require a future disbursement of assets or services resulting from a
prior business activity or transaction. For companies to make more informed decisions, liabilities need to be
classified into two specific categories: current liabilities and noncurrent (or long-term) liabilities. The
differentiating factor between current and long-term is when the liability is due. The focus of this chapter is on
current liabilities, while Long-Term Liabilities emphasizes long-term liabilities.

Fundamentals of Current Liabilities
A current liability is a debt or obligation due within a company’s standard operating period, typically a year,
although there are exceptions that are longer or shorter than a year. A company’s typical operating period
(sometimes called an operating cycle) is a year, which is used to delineate current and noncurrent liabilities,
and current liabilities are considered short term and are typically due within a year or less.
Noncurrent liabilities are long-term obligations with payment typically due in a subsequent operating period.
Current liabilities are reported on the classified balance sheet, listed before noncurrent liabilities. Changes in
current liabilities from the beginning of an accounting period to the end are reported on the statement of cash
flows as part of the cash flows from operations section. An increase in current liabilities over a period increases
cash flow, while a decrease in current liabilities decreases cash flow.
Current vs. Noncurrent Liabilities
Current Liabilities

Noncurrent Liabilities

Due within one year or less for a typical one-year

Due in more than one year or longer than one

operating period

operating period

Table 12.1 A delineator between current and noncurrent liabilities is one year or the company’s operating
period, whichever is longer.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

747

Current vs. Noncurrent Liabilities
Current Liabilities
Short-term accounts such as:
• Accounts Payable
• Salaries Payable

Noncurrent Liabilities
Long-term portion of obligations such as:
• Noncurrent portion of a longer-term account
such as Notes Payable or Bonds Payable

• Unearned Revenues
• Interest Payable
• Taxes Payable
• Notes Payable within one operating period
• Current portion of a longer-term account
such as Notes Payable or Bonds Payable

Table 12.1 A delineator between current and noncurrent liabilities is one year or the company’s operating
period, whichever is longer.

Examples of Current Liabilities
Common current liabilities include accounts payable, unearned revenues, the current portion of a note
payable, and taxes payable. Each of these liabilities is current because it results from a past business activity,
with a disbursement or payment due within a period of less than a year.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Proper Current Liabilities Reporting and Calculating Burn Rate
When using financial information prepared by accountants, decision-makers rely on ethical accounting
practices. For example, investors and creditors look to the current liabilities to assist in calculating a
company’s annual burn rate. The burn rate is the metric defining the monthly and annual cash needs of a
company. It is used to help calculate how long the company can maintain operations before becoming
insolvent. The proper classification of liabilities as current assists decision-makers in determining the
short-term and long-term cash needs of a company.
Another way to think about burn rate is as the amount of cash a company uses that exceeds the amount
of cash created by the company’s business operations. The burn rate helps indicate how quickly a
company is using its cash. Many start-ups have a high cash burn rate due to spending to start the
business, resulting in low cash flow. At first, start-ups typically do not create enough cash flow to sustain
operations.
Proper reporting of current liabilities helps decision-makers understand a company’s burn rate and how
much cash is needed for the company to meet its short-term and long-term cash obligations. If
misrepresented, the cash needs of the company may not be met, and the company can quickly go out of

748

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

business. Therefore, it is important that the accountant appropriately report current liabilities because a
creditor, investor, or other decision-maker’s understanding of a company’s specific cash needs helps
them make good financial decisions.

Accounts Payable
Accounts payable accounts for financial obligations owed to suppliers after purchasing products or services
on credit. This account may be an open credit line between the supplier and the company. An open credit line
is a borrowing agreement for an amount of money, supplies, or inventory. The option to borrow from the
lender can be exercised at any time within the agreed time period.
An account payable is usually a less formal arrangement than a promissory note for a current note payable.
Long-term debt is covered in depth in Long-Term Liabilities. For now, know that for some debt, including
short-term or current, a formal contract might be created. This contract provides additional legal protection
for the lender in the event of failure by the borrower to make timely payments. Also, the contract often
provides an opportunity for the lender to actually sell the rights in the contract to another party.
An invoice from the supplier (such as the one shown in Figure 12.2) detailing the purchase, credit terms,
invoice date, and shipping arrangements will suffice for this contractual relationship. In many cases, accounts
payable agreements do not include interest payments, unlike notes payable.

Figure 12.2

Accounts Payable. Contract terms for accounts payable transactions are usually listed on an

invoice. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
For example, assume the owner of a clothing boutique purchases hangers from a manufacturer on credit. The

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

749

organizations may establish an ongoing purchase agreement, which includes purchase details (such as hanger
prices and quantities), credit terms (2/10, n/60), an invoice date, and shipping charges (free on board [FOB]
shipping) for each order. The basics of shipping charges and credit terms were addressed in Merchandising
Transactions if you would like to refresh yourself on the mechanics. Also, to review accounts payable, you can
also return to Merchandising Transactions for detailed explanations.

Unearned Revenue
Unearned revenue, also known as deferred revenue, is a customer’s advance payment for a product or
service that has yet to be provided by the company. Some common unearned revenue situations include
subscription services, gift cards, advance ticket sales, lawyer retainer fees, and deposits for services. As you
learned when studying the accounting cycle (Analyzing and Recording Transactions, The Adjustment Process,
and Completing the Accounting Cycle), we are applying the principles of accrual accounting when revenues
and expenses are recognized in different months or years. Under accrual accounting, a company does not
record revenue as earned until it has provided a product or service, thus adhering to the revenue recognition
principle. Until the customer is provided an obligated product or service, a liability exists, and the amount paid
in advance is recognized in the Unearned Revenue account. As soon as the company provides all, or a portion,
of the product or service, the value is then recognized as earned revenue.
For example, assume that a landscaping company provides services to clients. The company requires advance
payment before rendering service. The customer’s advance payment for landscaping is recognized in the
Unearned Service Revenue account, which is a liability. Once the company has finished the client’s
landscaping, it may recognize all of the advance payment as earned revenue in the Service Revenue account. If
the landscaping company provides part of the landscaping services within the operating period, it may
recognize the value of the work completed at that time.
Perhaps at this point a simple example might help clarify the treatment of unearned revenue. Assume that the
previous landscaping company has a three-part plan to prepare lawns of new clients for next year. The plan
includes a treatment in November 2019, February 2020, and April 2020. The company has a special rate of $120
if the client prepays the entire $120 before the November treatment. In real life, the company would hope to
have dozens or more customers. However, to simplify this example, we analyze the journal entries from one
customer. Assume that the customer prepaid the service on October 15, 2019, and all three treatments occur
on the first day of the month of service. We also assume that $40 in revenue is allocated to each of the three
treatments.
Before examining the journal entries, we need some key information. Because part of the service will be
provided in 2019 and the rest in 2020, we need to be careful to keep the recognition of revenue in its proper
period. If all of the treatments occur, $40 in revenue will be recognized in 2019, with the remaining $80
recognized in 2020. Also, since the customer could request a refund before any of the services have been
provided, we need to ensure that we do not recognize revenue until it has been earned. While it is nice to
receive funding before you have performed the services, in essence, all you have received when you get the
money is a liability (unearned service revenue), with the hope of it eventually becoming revenue. The following
journal entries are built upon the client receiving all three treatments. First, for the prepayment of future
services and for the revenue earned in 2019, the journal entries are shown.

750

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

For the revenue earned in 2020, the journal entries would be.

Figure 12.3

Advance Ticket Sales. Season ticket sales are considered unearned revenue because customers

pay for them in advance of any games played. (credit: “Fans in Razorback Stadium (Fayetteville, AR)” by
Rmcclen/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Thinking about Unearned Revenue
When thinking about unearned revenue, consider the example of Amazon.com, Inc. Amazon has a large
business portfolio that includes a widening presence in the online product and service space. Amazon
has two services in particular that contribute to their unearned revenue account: Amazon Web Services
and Prime membership.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

751

According to Business Insider, Amazon had $4.8 billion in unearned revenue recognized in their fourth
quarter report (December 2016), with most of that contribution coming from Amazon Web Services.

[1]

This is an increase from prior quarters. The growth is due to larger and longer contracts for web services.
The advance payment for web services is transferred to revenue over the term of the contract. The same
is true for Prime membership. Amazon receives $99 in advance pay from customers, which is amortized
over the twelve-month period of the service agreement. This means that each month, Amazon only
recognizes $8.25 per Prime membership payment as earned revenue.

Current Portion of a Note Payable
A note payable is a debt to a lender with specific repayment terms, which can include principal and interest. A
note payable has written contractual terms that make it available to sell to another party. The principal on a
note refers to the initial borrowed amount, not including interest. In addition to repayment of principal,
interest may accrue. Interest is a monetary incentive to the lender, which justifies loan risk.
Let’s review the concept of interest. Interest is an expense that you might pay for the use of someone else’s
money. For example, if you have a credit card and you owe a balance at the end of the month it will typically
charge you a percentage, such as 1.5% a month (which is the same as 18% annually) on the balance that you
owe. Assuming that you owe $400, your interest charge for the month would be $400 × 1.5%, or $6.00. To pay
your balance due on your monthly statement would require $406 (the $400 balance due plus the $6 interest
expense).
We make one more observation about interest: interest rates are typically quoted in annual terms. For
example, if you borrowed money to buy a car, your interest expense might be quoted as 9%. Note that this is
an annual rate. If you are making monthly payments, the monthly charge for interest would be 9% divided by
twelve, or 0.75% a month. For example, if you borrowed $20,000, and made sixty equal monthly payments,
your monthly payment would be $415.17, and your interest expense component of the $415.17 payment
would be $150.00. The formula to calculate interest on either an annual or partial-year basis is:

In our example this would be

$20,000 × 9% × 1 = $150
12
The good news is that for a loan such as our car loan or even a home loan, the loan is typically what is called
fully amortizing. At this point, you just need to know that in our case the amount that you owe would go from a
balance due of $20,000 down to $0 after the twentieth payment and the part of your $415.17 monthly payment
allocated to interest would be less each month. For example, your last (sixtieth) payment would only incur
$3.09 in interest, with the remaining payment covering the last of the principle owed. See Figure 13.7 for an
exhibit that demonstrates this concept.

1 Eugene Kim. “An Overlooked Part of Amazon Will Be in the Spotlight When the Company Reports Earnings.” Business Insider. April 28, 2016.
https://www.businessinsider.com/amazon-unearned-revenue-growth-shows-why-it-spent-more-on-shipping-last-quarter-2016-4

752

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Applying Amortization
Car loans, mortgages, and education loans have an amortization process to pay down debt. Amortization
of a loan requires periodic scheduled payments of principal and interest until the loan is paid in full.
Every period, the same payment amount is due, but interest expense is paid first, with the remainder of
the payment going toward the principal balance. When a customer first takes out the loan, most of the
scheduled payment is made up of interest, and a very small amount goes to reducing the principal
balance. Over time, more of the payment goes toward reducing the principal balance rather than
interest.
For example, let’s say you take out a car loan in the amount of $10,000. The annual interest rate is 3%,
and you are required to make scheduled payments each month in the amount of $400. You first need to
determine the monthly interest rate by dividing 3% by twelve months (3%/12), which is 0.25%. The
monthly interest rate of 0.25% is multiplied by the outstanding principal balance of $10,000 to get an
interest expense of $25. The scheduled payment is $400; therefore, $25 is applied to interest, and the
remaining $375 ($400 – $25) is applied to the outstanding principal balance. This leaves an outstanding
principal balance of $9,625. Next month, interest expense is computed using the new principal balance
outstanding of $9,625. The new interest expense is $24.06 ($9,625 × 0.25%). This means $24.06 of the
$400 payment applies to interest, and the remaining $375.94 ($400 – $24.06) is applied to the outstanding
principal balance to get a new balance of $9,249.06 ($9,625 – $375.94). These computations occur until
the entire principal balance is paid in full.

A note payable is usually classified as a long-term (noncurrent) liability if the note period is longer than one
year or the standard operating period of the company. However, during the company’s current operating
period, any portion of the long-term note due that will be paid in the current period is considered a current
portion of a note payable. The outstanding balance note payable during the current period remains a
noncurrent note payable. Note that this does not include the interest portion of the payments. On the balance
sheet, the current portion of the noncurrent liability is separated from the remaining noncurrent liability. No
journal entry is required for this distinction, but some companies choose to show the transfer from a
noncurrent liability to a current liability.
For example, a bakery company may need to take out a $100,000 loan to continue business operations. The
bakery’s outstanding note principal is $100,000. Terms of the loan require equal annual principal repayments
of $10,000 for the next ten years. Payments will be made on July 1 of each of the ten years. Even though the
overall $100,000 note payable is considered long term, the $10,000 required repayment during the company’s
operating cycle is considered current (short term). This means $10,000 would be classified as the current
portion of a noncurrent note payable, and the remaining $90,000 would remain a noncurrent note payable.
The portion of a note payable due in the current period is recognized as current, while the remaining
outstanding balance is a noncurrent note payable. For example, Figure 12.4 shows that $18,000 of a $100,000
note payable is scheduled to be paid within the current period (typically within one year). The remaining
$82,000 is considered a long-term liability and will be paid over its remaining life.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Figure 12.4

753

Current Portion of a Noncurrent Note Payable. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
In addition to the $18,000 portion of the note payable that will be paid in the current year, any accrued interest
on both the current portion and the long-term portion of the note payable that is due will also be paid.
Assume, for example, that for the current year $7,000 of interest will be accrued. In the current year the debtor
will pay a total of $25,000—that is, $7,000 in interest and $18,000 for the current portion of the note payable. A
similar type of payment will be paid each year for as long as any of the note payable remains; however, the
annual interest expense would be reduced since the remaining note payable owed will be reduced by the
previous payments.
Interest payable can also be a current liability if accrual of interest occurs during the operating period but has
yet to be paid. An annual interest rate is established as part of the loan terms. Interest accrued is recorded in
Interest Payable (a credit) and Interest Expense (a debit). To calculate interest, the company can use the
following equations. This method assumes a twelve-month denominator in the calculation, which means that
we are using the calculation method based on a 360-day year. This method was more commonly used prior to
the ability to do the calculations using calculators or computers, because the calculation was easier to
perform. However, with today’s technology, it is more common to see the interest calculation performed using
a 365-day year. We will demonstrate both methods.

For example, we assume the bakery has an annual interest rate on its loan of 7%. The loan interest began
accruing on July 1 and it is now December 31. The bakery has accrued six months of interest and would
compute the interest liability as

$100,000 × 7% × 6 = $3,500
12
The $3,500 is recognized in Interest Payable (a credit) and Interest Expense (a debit).

Taxes Payable
Taxes payable refers to a liability created when a company collects taxes on behalf of employees and
customers or for tax obligations owed by the company, such as sales taxes or income taxes. A future payment
to a government agency is required for the amount collected. Some examples of taxes payable include sales
tax and income taxes.

754

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Sales taxes result from sales of products or services to customers. A percentage of the sale is charged to the
customer to cover the tax obligation (see Figure 12.5). The sales tax rate varies by state and local
municipalities but can range anywhere from 1.76% to almost 10% of the gross sales price. Some states do not
have sales tax because they want to encourage consumer spending. Those businesses subject to sales
taxation hold the sales tax in the Sales Tax Payable account until payment is due to the governing body.

Figure 12.5

Sales Tax. Many businesses are required to charge a sales tax on products or services sold.

(credit: modification of “Sales Tax” by Kerry Ceszyk/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)
For example, assume that each time a shoe store sells a $50 pair of shoes, it will charge the customer a sales
tax of 8% of the sales price. The shoe store collects a total of $54 from the customer. The $4 sales tax is a
current liability until distributed within the company’s operating period to the government authority collecting
sales tax.
Income taxes are required to be withheld from an employee’s salary for payment to a federal, state, or local
authority (hence they are known as withholding taxes). This withholding is a percentage of the employee’s
gross pay. Income taxes are discussed in greater detail in Record Transactions Incurred in Preparing Payroll.

LINK TO LEARNING
Businesses can use the Internal Revenue Service’s Sales Tax Deduction Calculator and associated tips
and guidance (https://openstax.org/l/50IRSTaxCalc) to determine their estimated sales tax obligation
owed to the state and local government authority.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

12.2

755

Analyze, Journalize, and Report Current Liabilities

To illustrate current liability entries, we use transaction information from Sierra Sports (see Figure 12.6). Sierra
Sports owns and operates a sporting goods store in the Southwest specializing in sports apparel and
equipment. The company engages in regular business activities with suppliers, creditors, customers, and
employees.

Figure 12.6

Sierra Sports Logo. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)

Accounts Payable
On August 1, Sierra Sports purchases $12,000 of soccer equipment from a manufacturer (supplier) on credit.
Assume for the following examples that Sierra Sports uses the perpetual inventory method, which uses the
Inventory account when the company buys, sells, or adjusts the inventory balance, such as in the following
example where they qualified for a discount. In the current transaction, credit terms are 2/10, n/30, the invoice
date is August 1, and shipping charges are FOB shipping point (which is included in the purchase cost).
Recall from Merchandising Transactions, that credit terms of 2/10, n/30 signal the payment terms and
discount, and FOB shipping point establishes the point of merchandise ownership, the responsibility during
transit, and which entity pays shipping charges. Therefore, 2/10, n/30 means Sierra Sports has ten days to pay
its balance due to receive a 2% discount, otherwise Sierra Sports has net thirty days, in this case August 31, to
pay in full but not receive a discount. FOB shipping point signals that since Sierra Sports takes ownership of
the merchandise when it leaves the manufacturer, it takes responsibility for the merchandise in transit and will
pay the shipping charges.
Sierra Sports would make the following journal entry on August 1.

The merchandise is purchased from the supplier on credit. In this case, Accounts Payable would increase (a
credit) for the full amount due. Inventory, the asset account, would increase (a debit) for the purchase price of
the merchandise.
If Sierra Sports pays the full amount owed on August 10, it qualifies for the discount, and the following entry
would occur.

756

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Assume that the payment to the manufacturer occurs within the discount period of ten days (2/10, n/30) and is
recognized in the entry. Accounts Payable decreases (debit) for the original amount due, Inventory decreases
(credit) for the discount amount of $240 ($12,000 × 2%), and Cash decreases (credit) for the remaining balance
due after discount.
Note that Inventory is decreased in this entry because the value of the merchandise (soccer equipment) is
reduced. When applying the perpetual inventory method, this reduction is required by generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP) (under the cost principle) to reflect the actual cost of the merchandise.
A second possibility is that Sierra will return part of the purchase before the ten-day discount window has
expired. Assume in this example that $1,000 of the $12,000 purchase was returned to the seller on August 8
and the remaining account payable due was paid by Sierra to the seller on August 10, which means that Sierra
qualified for the remaining eligible discount. The following two journal entries represent the return of
inventory and the subsequent payment for the remaining account payable owed. The initial journal entry from
August 1 will still apply, because we assume that Sierra intended to keep the full $12,000 of inventory when the
purchase was made.
When the $1,000 in inventory was returned on August 8, the accounts payable account and the inventory
accounts should be reduced by $1,000 as demonstrated in this journal entry.

After this transaction, Sierra still owed $11,000 and still had $11,000 in inventory from the purchase, assuming
that Sierra had not sold any of it yet.
When Sierra paid the remaining balance on August 10, the company qualified for the discount. However, since
Sierra only owed a remaining balance of $11,000 and not the original $12,000, the discount received was 2% of
$11,000, or $220, as demonstrated in this journal entry. Since Sierra owed $11,000 and received a discount of
$220, the supplier was paid $10,780. This second journal entry is the same as the one that would have
recognized an original purchase of $11,000 that qualified for a discount.

Remember that since we are assuming that Sierra was using the perpetual inventory method, purchases,

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

757

payments, and adjustments in goods available for sale are reflected in the company’s Inventory account. In
our example, one of the potential adjustments is that discounts received are recorded as reductions to the
Inventory account.
To demonstrate this concept, after buying $12,000 in inventory, returning $1,000 in inventory, and then paying
for the remaining balance and qualifying for the discount, Sierra’s Inventory balance increased by $10,780, as
shown.

If Sierra had bought $11,000 of inventory on August 1 and paid cash and taken the discount, after taking the
$220 discount, the increase of Inventory on their balance sheet would have been $10,780, as it finally ended up
being in our more complicated set of transactions on three different days. The important factor is that the
company qualified for a 2% discount on inventory that had a retail price before discounts of $11,000.
In a final possible scenario, assume that Sierra Sports remitted payment outside of the discount window on
August 28, but inside of thirty days. In this case, they did not qualify for the discount, and assuming that they
made no returns they paid the full, undiscounted balance of $12,000.

If this occurred, both Accounts Payable and Cash decreased by $12,000. Inventory is not affected in this
instance because the full cost of the merchandise was paid; so, the increase in value for the inventory was
$12,000, and not the $11,760 value determined in our beginning transactions where they qualified for the
discount.

YOUR TURN
Accounting for Advance Payments
You are the owner of a catering company and require advance payments from clients before providing
catering services. You receive an order from the Coopers, who would like you to cater their wedding on
June 10. The Coopers pay you $5,500 cash on March 25. Record your journal entries for the initial
payment from the Coopers, and when the catering service has been provided on June 10.
Solution

758

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Unearned Revenue
Sierra Sports has contracted with a local youth football league to provide all uniforms for participating teams.
The league pays for the uniforms in advance, and Sierra Sports provides the customized uniforms shortly after
purchase. The following situation shows the journal entry for the initial purchase with cash. Assume the league
pays Sierra Sports for twenty uniforms (cost per uniform is $30, for a total of $600) on April 3.

Sierra Sports would see an increase to Cash (debit) for the payment made from the football league. The
revenue from the sale of the uniforms is $600 (20 uniforms × $30 per uniform). Unearned Uniform Revenue
accounts reflect the prepayment from the league, which cannot be recognized as earned revenue until the
uniforms are provided. Unearned Uniform Revenue is a current liability account that increases (credit) with the
increase in outstanding product debt.
Sierra provides the uniforms on May 6 and records the following entry.

Now that Sierra has provided all of the uniforms, the unearned revenue can be recognized as earned. This
satisfies the revenue recognition principle. Therefore, Unearned Uniform Revenue would decrease (debit), and
Uniform Revenue would increase (credit) for the total amount.
Let’s say that Sierra only provides half the uniforms on May 6 and supplies the rest of the order on June 2. The
company may not recognize revenue until a product (or a portion of a product) has been provided. This means
only half the revenue can be recognized on May 6 ($300) because only half of the uniforms were provided. The
rest of the revenue recognition will have to wait until June 2. Since only half of the uniforms were delivered on

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

759

May 6, only half of the costs of goods sold would be recognized on May 6. The other half of the costs of goods
sold would be recognized on June 2 when the other half of the uniforms were delivered. The following entries
show the separate entries for partial revenue recognition.

In another scenario using the same cost information, assume that on April 3, the league contracted for the
production of the uniforms on credit with terms 5/10, n/30. They signed a contract for the production of the
uniforms, so an account receivable was created for Sierra, as shown.

Sierra and the league have worked out credit terms and a discount agreement. As such, the league can delay
cash payment for ten days and receive a discount, or for thirty days with no discount assessed. Instead of cash
increasing for Sierra, Accounts Receivable increases (debit) for the amount the football league owes.
The league pays for the uniforms on April 15, and Sierra provides all uniforms on May 6. The following entry
shows the payment on credit.

The football league made payment outside of the discount period, since April 15 is more than ten days from
the invoice date. Thus, they do not receive the 5% discount. Cash increases (debit) for the $600 paid by the
football league, and Accounts Receivable decreases (credit).
In the next example, let’s assume that the league made payment within the discount window, on April 13. The
following entry occurs.

760

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

In this case, Accounts Receivable decreases (credit) for the original amount owed, Sales Discount increases
(debit) for the discount amount of $30 ($600 × 5%), and Cash increases (debit) for the $570 paid by the football
league less discount.
When the company provides the uniforms on May 6, Unearned Uniform Revenue decreases (debit) and
Uniform Revenue increases (credit) for $600.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Stock Options and Unearned Revenue Manipulation
The anticipated income of public companies is projected by stock market analysts through whisperearnings, or forecasted earnings. It can be advantageous for a company to have its stock beat the stock
market’s expectation of earnings. Likewise, falling below the market’s expectation can be a
disadvantage. If a company’s whisper-earnings are not going to be met, there could be pressure on the
chief financial officer to misrepresent earnings through manipulation of unearned revenue accounts to
better match the stock market’s expectation.
Because many executives, other top management, and even employees have stock options, this can also
provide incentive to manipulate earnings. A stock option sets a minimum price for the stock on a certain
date. This is the date the option vests, at what is commonly called the strike price. Options are worthless if
the stock price on the vesting date is lower than the price at which they were granted. This could result in
a loss of income, potentially incentivizing earnings manipulation to meet the stock market’s expectations
and exceed the vested stock price in the option.
Researchers have found that when executive options are about to vest, companies are more likely to
present financial statements meeting or just slightly beating the earnings forecasts of analysts. The
proximity of the actual earnings to earnings forecasts suggests they were manipulated because of the
vesting.

[2]

As Douglas R. Carmichael points out, “public companies that fail to report quarterly earnings

which meet or exceed analysts’ expectations often experience a drop in their stock prices. This can lead
to practices that sometimes include fraudulent overstatement of quarterly revenue.”

[3]

If earnings meet

or exceed expectations, a stock price can hit or surpass the vested stock price in the option. For company
members with stock options, this could result in higher income. Thus, financial statements that align

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

761

closely with analysts’ estimates, rather than showing large projections above or below whisper-earnings,
could indicate that accounting information has possibly been adjusted to meet the expected numbers.
Such manipulations can be made in unearned revenue accounts.
In November 1998, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued Practice Alert 98-3, Revenue
Recognition Issues, SEC Practice Section Professional Issues Task Force, recognizing and discussing the
manipulation of earnings used to exceed stock market and analysts’ expectations. Accountants should
watch for revenue recognition related issues in preparing the financial statements of their company or
client, especially when employees’ or management’s stock options are about to vest.

Current Portion of a Noncurrent Note Payable
Sierra Sports takes out a bank loan on January 1, 2017 to cover expansion costs for a new store. The note
amount is $360,000. The note has terms of repayment that include equal principal payments annually over the
next twenty years. The annual interest rate on the loan is 9%. Interest accumulates each month based on the
standard interest rate formula discussed previously, and on the current outstanding principal balance of the
loan. Sierra records interest accumulation every three months, at the end of each third month. The initial loan
(note) entry follows.

Notes Payable increases (credit) for the full loan principal amount. Cash increases (debit) as well. On March 31,
the end of the first three months, Sierra records their first interest accumulation.

Interest Expense increases (debit) as does Interest Payable (credit) for the amount of interest accumulated but
unpaid at the end of the three-month period. The amount $8,100 is found by using the interest formula, where
the outstanding principal balance is $360,000, interest rate of 9%, and the part of the year being three out of
twelve months: $360,000 × 9% × (3/12).
The same entry for interest will occur every three months until year-end. When accumulated interest is paid on
January 1 of the following year, Sierra would record this entry.

2 Jena McGregor. “How Stock Options Lead CEOs to Put Their Own Interests First.” Washington Post. February 11, 2014.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/on-leadership/wp/2014/02/11/how-stock-options-lead-ceos-to-put-their-own-interestsfirst/?utm_term=.24d99a4fb1a5
3 Douglas R. Carmichael. “Hocus-Pocus Accounting.” Journal of Accountancy. October 1, 1999. https://www.journalofaccountancy.com/issues/
1999/oct/carmichl.html

762

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Both Interest Payable and Cash decrease for the total interest amount accumulated during 2017. This is
calculated by taking each three-month interest accumulation of $8,100 and multiplying by the four recorded
interest entries for the periods. You could also compute this by taking the original principal balance and
multiplying by 9%.
On December 31, 2017, the first principal payment is due. The following entry occurs to show payment of this
principal amount due in the current period.

Notes Payable decreases (debit), as does Cash (credit), for the amount of the noncurrent note payable due in
the current period. This amount is calculated by dividing the original principal amount ($360,000) by twenty
years to get an annual current principal payment of $18,000 ($360,000/20).
While the accounts used to record a reduction in Notes Payable are the same as the accounts used for a
noncurrent note, the reporting on the balance sheet is classified in a different area. The current portion of the
noncurrent note payable ($18,000) is reported under Current Liabilities, and the remaining noncurrent balance
of $342,000 ($360,000 – $18,000) is classified and displayed under noncurrent liabilities, as shown in
Figure 12.7.

Figure 12.7

Sierra Sports Balance Sheet. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-

SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

763

Taxes Payable
Let’s consider our previous example where Sierra Sports purchased $12,000 of soccer equipment in August.
Sierra now sells the soccer equipment to a local soccer league for $18,000 cash on August 20. The sales tax
rate is 6%. The following revenue entry would occur.

Cash increases (debit) for the sales amount plus sales tax. Sales Tax Payable increases (credit) for the 6% tax
rate ($18,000 × 6%). Sierra’s tax liability is owed to the State Tax Board. Sales increases (credit) for the original
amount of the sale, not including sales tax. If Sierra’s customer pays on credit, Accounts Receivable would
increase (debit) for $19,080 rather than Cash.
When Sierra remits payment to the State Tax Board on October 1, the following entry occurs.

Sales Tax Payable and Cash decrease for the payment amount of $1,080. Sales tax is not an expense to the
business because the company is holding it on account for another entity.
Sierra Sports payroll tax journal entries will appear in Record Transactions Incurred in Preparing Payroll.

YOUR TURN
Accounting for Purchase Discounts
You own a shipping and packaging facility and provide shipping services to customers. You have worked
out a contract with a local supplier to provide your business with packing materials on an ongoing basis.
Terms of your agreement allow for delayed payment of up to thirty days from the invoice date, with an
incentive to pay within ten days to receive a 5% discount on the packing materials. On April 3, you
purchase 1,000 boxes (Box Inventory) from this supplier at a cost per box of $1.25. You pay the amount
due to the supplier on April 11. Record the journal entries to recognize the initial purchase on April 3, and
payment of the amount due on April 11.
Solution

764

12.3

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Define and Apply Accounting Treatment for Contingent Liabilities

What happens if your business anticipates incurring a loss or debt? Do you need to report this if you are
uncertain it will occur? What if you know the loss or debt will occur but it has not happened yet? Do you have
to report this event now, or in the future? These are questions businesses must ask themselves when
exploring contingencies and their effect on liabilities.
A contingency occurs when a current situation has an outcome that is unknown or uncertain and will not be
resolved until a future point in time. The outcome could be positive or negative. A contingent liability can
produce a future debt or negative obligation for the company. Some examples of contingent liabilities include
pending litigation (legal action), warranties, customer insurance claims, and bankruptcy.
While a contingency may be positive or negative, we only focus on outcomes that may produce a liability for
the company (negative outcome), since these might lead to adjustments in the financial statements in certain
cases. Positive contingencies do not require or allow the same types of adjustments to the company’s financial
statements as do negative contingencies, since accounting standards do not permit positive contingencies to
be recorded.
Pending litigation involves legal claims against the business that may be resolved at a future point in time. The
outcome of the lawsuit has yet to be determined but could have negative future impact on the business.
Warranties arise from products or services sold to customers that cover certain defects (see Figure 12.8). It is
unclear if a customer will need to use a warranty, and when, but this is a possibility for each product or service
sold that includes a warranty. The same idea applies to insurance claims (car, life, and fire, for example), and
bankruptcy. There is an uncertainty that a claim will transpire, or bankruptcy will occur. If the contingencies do
occur, it may still be uncertain when they will come to fruition, or the financial implications.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Figure 12.8

765

One-Year Warranty. Companies may offer product or service warranties. (credit: modification of

“Seal Guaranteed” by “harshahars”/Pixabay, CC0)
The answer to whether or not uncertainties must be reported comes from Financial Accounting Standards
Board (FASB) pronouncements.

Two Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Requirements for Recognition of a
Contingent Liability
There are two requirements for contingent liability recognition:
1. There is a likelihood of occurrence.
2. Measurement of the occurrence is classified as either estimable or inestimable.

Application of Likelihood of Occurrence Requirement
Let’s explore the likelihood of occurrence requirement in more detail.
According to the FASB, if there is a probable liability determination before the preparation of financial
statements has occurred, there is a likelihood of occurrence, and the liability must be disclosed and
recognized. This financial recognition and disclosure are recognized in the current financial statements. The
income statement and balance sheet are typically impacted by contingent liabilities.
For example, Sierra Sports has a one-year warranty on part repairs and replacements for a soccer goal they
sell. The warranty is good for one year. Sierra Sports notices that some of its soccer goals have rusted screws
that require replacement, but they have already sold goals with this problem to customers. There is a
probability that someone who purchased the soccer goal may bring it in to have the screws replaced. Not only
does the contingent liability meet the probability requirement, it also meets the measurement requirement.

Application of Measurement Requirement
The measurement requirement refers to the company’s ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss.
Even though a reasonable estimate is the company’s best guess, it should not be a frivolous number. For a
financial figure to be reasonably estimated, it could be based on past experience or industry standards (see
Figure 12.9). It could also be determined by the potential future, known financial outcome.

766

Figure 12.9

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Contingent Liabilities Estimation Checklist. These are possible ways to determine a contingent

liability financial estimate. (credit: modification of “Checklist” by Alan Cleaver/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Let’s continue to use Sierra Sports’ soccer goal warranty as our example. If the warranties are honored, the
company should know how much each screw costs, labor cost required, time commitment, and any overhead
costs incurred. This amount could be a reasonable estimate for the parts repair cost per soccer goal. Since not
all warranties may be honored (warranty expired), the company needs to make a reasonable determination
for the amount of honored warranties to get a more accurate figure.
Another way to establish the warranty liability could be an estimation of honored warranties as a percentage
of sales. In this instance, Sierra could estimate warranty claims at 10% of its soccer goal sales.
When determining if the contingent liability should be recognized, there are four potential treatments to
consider.
Let’s expand our discussion and add a brief example of the calculation and application of warranty expenses.
To begin, in many ways a warranty expense works similarly to the bad debt expense concept covered in
Accounting for Receivables in that the anticipated expense is determined by examining past period expense
experiences and then basing the current expense on current sales data. Also, as with bad debts, the warranty
repairs typically are made in an accounting period sometimes months or even years after the initial sale of the
product, which means that we need to estimate future costs to comply with the revenue recognition and
matching principles of generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
Some industries have such a large number of transactions and a vast data bank of past warranty claims that
they have an easier time estimating potential warranty claims, while other companies have a harder time
estimating future claims. In our case, we make assumptions about Sierra Sports and build our discussion on
the estimated experiences.
For our purposes, assume that Sierra Sports has a line of soccer goals that sell for $800, and the company
anticipates selling 500 goals this year (2019). Past experience for the goals that the company has sold is that
5% of them will need to be repaired under their three-year warranty program, and the cost of the average
repair is $200. To simplify our example, we concentrate strictly on the journal entries for the warranty expense
recognition and the application of the warranty repair pool. If the company sells 500 goals in 2019 and 5%
need to be repaired, then 25 goals will be repaired at an average cost of $200. The average cost of $200 × 25
goals gives an anticipated future repair cost of $5,000 for 2019. Assume for the sake of our example that in

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

767

2020 Sierra Sports made repairs that cost $2,800. Following are the necessary journal entries to record the
expense in 2019 and the repairs in 2020. The resources used in the warranty repair work could have included
several options, such as parts and labor, but to keep it simple we allocated all of the expenses to repair parts
inventory. Since the company’s inventory of supply parts (an asset) went down by $2,800, the reduction is
reflected with a credit entry to repair parts inventory. First, following is the necessary journal entry to record
the expense in 2019.

Next, here is the journal entry to record the repairs in 2020.

Before we finish, we need to address one more issue. Our example only covered the warranty expenses
anticipated from the 2019 sales. Since the company has a three-year warranty, and it estimated repair costs of
$5,000 for the goals sold in 2019, there is still a balance of $2,200 left from the original $5,000. However, its
actual experiences could be more, the same, or less than $2,200. If it is determined that too much is being set
aside in the allowance, then future annual warranty expenses can be adjusted downward. If it is determined
that not enough is being accumulated, then the warranty expense allowance can be increased.
Since this warranty expense allocation will probably be carried on for many years, adjustments in the
estimated warranty expenses can be made to reflect actual experiences. Also, sales for 2020, 2021, 2022, and
all subsequent years will need to reflect the same types of journal entries for their sales. In essence, as long as
Sierra Sports sells the goals or other equipment and provides a warranty, it will need to account for the
warranty expenses in a manner similar to the one we demonstrated.

THINK IT THROUGH
Product Recalls: Contingent Liabilities?
Consider the following scenario: A hoverboard is a self-balancing scooter that uses body position and
weight transfer to control the device. Hoverboards use a lithium-ion battery pack, which was found to
overheat causing an increased risk for the product to catch fire or explode. Several people were badly
injured from these fires and explosions. As a result, a recall was issued in mid-2016 on most hoverboard
models. Customers were asked to return the product to the original point of sale (the retailer). Retailers
were required to accept returns and provide repair when available. In some cases, retailers were held

768

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

accountable by consumers, and not the manufacturer of the hoverboards. You are the retailer in this
situation and must decide if the hoverboard scenario creates any contingent liabilities. If so, what are the
contingent liabilities? Do the conditions meet FASB requirements for contingent liability reporting?
Which of the four possible treatments are best suited for the potential liabilities identified? Are there any
journal entries or note disclosures necessary?

Four Potential Treatments for Contingent Liabilities
If the contingency is probable and estimable, it is likely to occur and can be reasonably estimated. In this
case, the liability and associated expense must be journalized and included in the current period’s financial
statements (balance sheet and income statement) along with note disclosures explaining the reason for
recognition. The note disclosures are a GAAP requirement pertaining to the full disclosure principle, as
detailed in Analyzing and Recording Transactions.
If the contingent liability is probable and inestimable, it is likely to occur but cannot be reasonably estimated.
In this case, a note disclosure is required in financial statements, but a journal entry and financial recognition
should not occur until a reasonable estimate is possible.
If the contingency is reasonably possible, it could occur but is not probable. The amount may or may not be
estimable. Since this condition does not meet the requirement of likelihood, it should not be journalized or
financially represented within the financial statements. Rather, it is disclosed in the notes only with any
available details, financial or otherwise.
If the contingent liability is considered remote, it is unlikely to occur and may or may not be estimable. This
does not meet the likelihood requirement, and the possibility of actualization is minimal. In this situation, no
journal entry or note disclosure in financial statements is necessary.
Financial Statement Treatments
Journalize

Note Disclosure

Probable and estimable

Yes

Yes

Probable and inestimable

No

Yes

Reasonably possible

No

Yes

Remote

No

No

Table 12.2 Four Treatments of Contingent Liabilities. Proper recognition of the four contingent liability
treatments.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

769

LINK TO LEARNING
Google, a subsidiary of Alphabet Inc., has expanded from a search engine to a global brand with a variety
of product and service offerings. Like many other companies, contingent liabilities are carried on
Google’s balance sheet, report expenses related to these contingencies on its income statement, and
note disclosures are provided to explain its contingent liability treatments. Check out Google’s
contingent liability considerations in this press release for Alphabet Inc.’s First Quarter 2017 Results
(https://openstax.org/l/50Alphabet2017) to see a financial statement package, including note
disclosures.

Let’s review some contingent liability treatment examples as they relate to our fictitious company, Sierra
Sports.

Probable and Estimable
If Sierra Sports determines the cost of the soccer goal screws are $30, the labor requirement is one hour at a
rate of $40 per hour, and there is no extra overhead applied, then the total estimated warranty repair cost
would be $70 per goal: $30 + (1 hour × $40 per hour). Sierra Sports sold ten goals before it discovered the rusty
screw issue. The company believes that only six of those goals will have their warranties honored, based on
past experience. This means Sierra will incur a warranty liability of $420 ($70 × 6 goals). The $420 is considered
probable and estimable and is recorded in Warranty Liability and Warranty Expense accounts during the
period of discovery (current period).

An example of determining a warranty liability based on a percentage of sales follows. The sales price per
soccer goal is $1,200, and Sierra Sports believes 10% of sales will result in honored warranties. The company
would record this warranty liability of $120 ($1,200 × 10%) to Warranty Liability and Warranty Expense
accounts.

When the warranty is honored, this would reduce the Warranty Liability account and decrease the asset used
for repair (Parts: Screws account) or Cash, if applicable. The recognition would happen as soon as the warranty
is honored. This first entry shown is to recognize honored warranties for all six goals.

770

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

This second entry recognizes an honored warranty for a soccer goal based on 10% of sales from the period.

As you’ve learned, not only are warranty expense and warranty liability journalized, but they are also
recognized on the income statement and balance sheet. The following examples show recognition of Warranty
Expense on the income statement Figure 12.10 and Warranty Liability on the balance sheet Figure 12.11 for
Sierra Sports.

Figure 12.10

Sierra Sports’ Income Statement. Warranty Expense is recognized on the income statement.

(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Figure 12.11

771

Sierra Sports’ Balance Sheet. Warranty Liability is recognized on the balance sheet. (attribution:

Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Probable and Not Estimable
Assume that Sierra Sports is sued by one of the customers who purchased the faulty soccer goals. A
settlement of responsibility in the case has been reached, but the actual damages have not been determined
and cannot be reasonably estimated. This is considered probable but inestimable, because the lawsuit is very
likely to occur (given a settlement is agreed upon) but the actual damages are unknown. No journal entry or
financial adjustment in the financial statements will occur. Instead, Sierra Sports will include a note describing
any details available about the lawsuit. When damages have been determined, or have been reasonably
estimated, then journalizing would be appropriate.
Sierra Sports could say the following in its financial statement disclosures: “There is pending litigation against
our company with the likelihood of settlement probable. Detailed terms and damages have not yet reached
agreement, and a reasonable assessment of financial impact is currently unknown.”

Reasonably Possible
Sierra Sports may have more litigation in the future surrounding the soccer goals. These lawsuits have not yet
been filed or are in the very early stages of the litigation process. Since there is a past precedent for lawsuits of
this nature but no establishment of guilt or formal arrangement of damages or timeline, the likelihood of
occurrence is reasonably possible. The outcome is not probable but is not remote either. Since the outcome is
possible, the contingent liability is disclosed in Sierra Sports’ financial statement notes.
Sierra Sports could say the following in their financial statement disclosures: “We anticipate more claimants
filing legal action against our company with the likelihood of settlement reasonably possible. Assignment of
guilt, detailed terms, and potential damages have not been established. A reasonable assessment of financial
impact is currently unknown.”

772

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Remote
Sierra Sports worries that as a result of pending litigation and losses associated with the faulty soccer goals,
the company might have to file for bankruptcy. After consulting with a financial advisor, the company is pretty
certain it can continue operating in the long term without restructuring. The chances are remote that a
bankruptcy would occur. Sierra Sports would not recognize this remote occurrence on the financial statements
or provide a note disclosure.

IFRS CONNECTION
Current Liabilities
US GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) define “current liabilities” similarly and
use the same reporting criteria for most all types of current liabilities. However, two primary differences
exist between US GAAP and IFRS: the reporting of (1) debt due on demand and (2) contingencies.
Liquidity and solvency are measures of a company’s ability to pay debts as they come due. Liquidity
measures evaluate a company’s ability to pay current debts as they come due, while solvency measures
evaluate the ability to pay debts long term. One common liquidity measure is the current ratio, and a
higher ratio is preferred over a lower one. This ratio—current assets divided by current liabilities—is
lowered by an increase in current liabilities (the denominator increases while we assume that the
numerator remains the same). When lenders arrange loans with their corporate customers, limits are
typically set on how low certain liquidity ratios (such as the current ratio) can go before the bank can
demand that the loan be repaid immediately.
In theory, debt that has not been paid and that has become “on demand” would be considered a current
liability. However, in determining how to report a loan that has become “on-demand,” US GAAP and IFRS
differ:
• Under US GAAP, debts on which payment has been demanded because of violations of the
contractual agreement between the lender and creditor are only included in current liabilities if, by
the financial statement presentation date, there have been no arrangements made to pay off or
restructure the debt. This allows companies time between the end of the fiscal year and the actual
publication of the financial statements (typically two months) to make arrangements for repayment
of the loan. Most often these loans are refinanced.
• Under IFRS, any payment or refinancing arrangements must be made by the fiscal year-end of the
debtor. This difference means that companies reporting under IFRS must be proactive in assessing
whether their debt agreements will be violated and make appropriate arrangements for refinancing
or differing payment options prior to final year-end numbers being reported.
A second set of differences exist regarding reporting contingencies. Where US GAAP uses the term
“contingencies,” IFRS uses “provisions.” In both cases, gain contingencies are not recorded until they are
essentially realized. Both systems want to avoid prematurely recording or overstating gains based on the
principles of conservatism. Loss contingencies are recorded (accrued) if certain conditions are met:
• Under US GAAP, loss contingencies are accrued if they are probable and can be estimated. Probable
means “likely” to occur and is often assessed as an 80% likelihood by practitioners.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

773

• Under IFRS, probable is defined as “more likely than not” and is typically assessed at 50% by
practitioners.
The determination of whether a contingency is probable is based on the judgment of auditors and
management in both situations. This means a contingent situation such as a lawsuit might be accrued
under IFRS but not accrued under US GAAP. Finally, how a loss contingency is measured varies between
the two options as well. For example, if a company is told it will be probable that it will lose an active
lawsuit, and the legal team gives a range of the dollar value of that loss, under IFRS, the discounted
midpoint of that range would be accrued, and the range disclosed. Under US GAAP, the low end of the
range would be accrued, and the range disclosed.

12.4

Prepare Journal Entries to Record Short-Term Notes Payable

If you have ever taken out a payday loan, you may have experienced a situation where your living expenses
temporarily exceeded your assets. You need enough money to cover your expenses until you get your next
paycheck. Once you receive that paycheck, you can repay the lender the amount you borrowed, plus a little
extra for the lender’s assistance.
There is an ebb and flow to business that can sometimes produce this same situation, where business
expenses temporarily exceed revenues. Even if a company finds itself in this situation, bills still need to be
paid. The company may consider a short-term note payable to cover the difference.
A short-term note payable is a debt created and due within a company’s operating period (less than a year).
Some key characteristics of this written promise to pay (see Figure 12.12) include an established date for
repayment, a specific payable amount, interest terms, and the possibility of debt resale to another party. A
short-term note is classified as a current liability because it is wholly honored within a company’s operating
period. This payable account would appear on the balance sheet under Current Liabilities.

Figure 12.12

Short-Term Promissory Note. A promissory note includes terms of repayment, such as the date

and interest rate. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

774

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Debt sale to a third party is a possibility with any loan, which includes a short-term note payable. The terms of
the agreement will state this resale possibility, and the new debt owner honors the agreement terms of the
original parties. A lender may choose this option to collect cash quickly and reduce the overall outstanding
debt.
We now consider two short-term notes payable situations; one is created by a purchase, and the other is
created by a loan.

THINK IT THROUGH
Promissory Notes: Time to Issue More Debt?
A common practice for government entities, particularly schools, is to issue short-term (promissory)
notes to cover daily expenditures until revenues are received from tax collection, lottery funds, and other
sources. School boards approve the note issuances, with repayments of principal and interest typically
met within a few months.
The goal is to fully cover all expenses until revenues are distributed from the state. However, revenues
distributed fluctuate due to changes in collection expectations, and schools may not be able to cover
their expenditures in the current period. This leads to a dilemma—whether or not to issue more shortterm notes to cover the deficit.
Short-term debt may be preferred over long-term debt when the entity does not want to devote
resources to pay interest over an extended period of time. In many cases, the interest rate is lower than
long-term debt, because the loan is considered less risky with the shorter payback period. This shorter
payback period is also beneficial with amortization expenses; short-term debt typically does not
amortize, unlike long-term debt.
What would you do if you found your school in this situation? Would you issue more debt? Are there
alternatives? What are some positives and negatives to the promissory note practice?

Recording Short-Term Notes Payable Created by a Purchase
A short-term notes payable created by a purchase typically occurs when a payment to a supplier does not
occur within the established time frame. The supplier might require a new agreement that converts the
overdue accounts payable into a short-term note payable (see Figure 12.13), with interest added. This gives the
company more time to make good on outstanding debt and gives the supplier an incentive for delaying
payment. Also, the creation of the note payable creates a stronger legal position for the owner of the note,
since the note is a negotiable legal instrument that can be more easily enforced in court actions.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Figure 12.13

775

Accounts Payable Conversion. Accounts Payable may be converted into a short-term notes

payable, if there is a default on payment. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA
4.0 license)
To illustrate, let’s revisit Sierra Sports’ purchase of soccer equipment on August 1. Sierra Sports purchased
$12,000 of soccer equipment from a supplier on credit. Credit terms were 2/10, n/30, invoice date August 1.
Let’s assume that Sierra Sports was unable to make the payment due within 30 days. On August 31, the
supplier renegotiates terms with Sierra and converts the accounts payable into a written note, requiring full
payment in two months, beginning September 1. Interest is now included as part of the payment terms at an
annual rate of 10%. The conversion entry from an account payable to a Short-Term Note Payable in Sierra’s
journal is shown.

Accounts Payable decreases (debit) and Short-Term Notes Payable increases (credit) for the original amount
owed of $12,000. When Sierra pays cash for the full amount due, including interest, on October 31, the
following entry occurs.

Since Sierra paid the full amount due, Short-Term Notes Payable decreases (debit) for the principal amount of
the debt. Interest Expense increases (debit) for two months of interest accumulation. Interest Expense is
found from our earlier equation, where Interest = Principal × Annual interest rate × Part of year ($12,000 × 10%
× [2/12]), which is $200. Cash decreases (credit) for $12,200, which is the principal plus the interest due.
The other short-term note scenario is created by a loan.

Recording Short-Term Notes Payable Created by a Loan
A short-term notes payable created by a loan transpires when a business incurs debt with a lender
Figure 12.14. A business may choose this path when it does not have enough cash on hand to finance a capital
expenditure immediately but does not need long-term financing. The business may also require an influx of

776

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

cash to cover expenses temporarily. There is a written promise to pay the principal balance and interest due
on or before a specific date. This payment period is within a company’s operating period (less than a year).
Consider a short-term notes payable scenario for Sierra Sports.

Figure 12.14

Bank Loan. A short-term note can be created from a loan. (credit: “Business Paperwork Deal”

by “rawpixel”/Pixabay, CC0)
Sierra Sports requires a new apparel printing machine after experiencing an increase in custom uniform
orders. Sierra does not have enough cash on hand currently to pay for the machine, but the company does not
need long-term financing. Sierra borrows $150,000 from the bank on October 1, with payment due within
three months (December 31), at a 12% annual interest rate. The following entry occurs when Sierra initially
takes out the loan.

Cash increases (debit) as does Short-Term Notes Payable (credit) for the principal amount of the loan, which is
$150,000. When Sierra pays in full on December 31, the following entry occurs.

Short-Term Notes Payable decreases (a debit) for the principal amount of the loan ($150,000). Interest Expense

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

777

increases (a debit) for $4,500 (calculated as $150,000 principal × 12% annual interest rate × [3/12 months]).
Cash decreases (a credit) for the principal amount plus interest due.

LINK TO LEARNING
Loan calculators can help businesses determine the amount they are able to borrow from a lender given
certain factors, such as loan amount, terms, interest rate, and payback categorization (payback
periodically or at the end of the loan, for example). A group of information technology professionals
provides one such loan calculator with definitions and additional information and tools
(https://openstax.org/l/50LoanCalc) to provide more information.

12.5

Record Transactions Incurred in Preparing Payroll

Have you ever looked at your paycheck and wondered where all the money went? Well, it did not disappear;
the money was used to contribute required and optional financial payments to various entities.
Payroll can be one of the largest expenses and potential liabilities for a business. Payroll liabilities include
employee salaries and wages, and deductions for taxes, benefits, and employer contributions. In this section,
we explain these elements of payroll and the required journal entries.

Employee Compensation and Deductions
As an employee working in a business, you receive compensation for your work. This pay could be a monthly
salary or hourly wages paid periodically. The amount earned by the employee before any reductions in pay
occur is considered gross income (pay). These reductions include involuntary and voluntary deductions. The
remaining balance after deductions is considered net income (pay), or “take-home-pay.” The take-home-pay
is what employees receive and deposit in their bank accounts.

Involuntary Deductions
Involuntary deductions are withholdings that neither the employer nor the employee have control over and
are required by law.
Federal, state, and local income taxes are considered involuntary deductions. Income taxes imposed are
different for every employee and are based on their W-4 Form, the Employee’s Withholding Allowance
Certificate. An employee will fill in his or her marital status, number of allowances requested, and any
additional reduction amounts. The employer will use this information to determine the federal income tax
withholding amount from each paycheck. State income tax withholding may also use W-4 information or
the state’s withholdings certificate. The federal income tax withholding and state income tax withholding
amounts can be established with tax tables published annually by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) (see
Figure 12.15) and state government offices, respectively. Some states though do not require an income tax
withholding, since they do not impose a state income tax. Federal and state income liabilities are held in
payable accounts until disbursement to the governmental bodies that administer the tax compliance process

778

for their particular governmental entity.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Figure 12.15

Wage Bracket Tax Withholding Table: Single Persons (2017). These are the monthly tax

withholding amounts recommended by the IRS for wages earned by single persons in 2017. (credit:

779

780

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

“Employer’s Tax Guide” by Department of the Treasury Internal Revenue Service, Public Domain)
While not a common occurrence, local income tax withholding is applied to those living or working within a
jurisdiction to cover schooling, social services, park maintenance, and law enforcement. If local income taxes
are withheld, these remain current liabilities until paid.
Other involuntary deductions involve Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) taxes for Social Security
and Medicare. FICA mandates employers to withhold taxes from employee wages “to provide benefits for
retirees, the disabled, and children.” The Social Security tax rate is 6.2% of employee gross wages. As of 2017,
there is a maximum taxable earnings amount of $127,200. Meaning, only the first $127,200 of each employee’s
gross wages has the Social Security tax applied. In 2018, the maximum taxable earnings amount increased to
$128,400. The Medicare tax rate is 1.45% of employee gross income. There is no taxable earnings cap for
Medicare tax. The two taxes combined equal 7.65% (6.2% + 1.45%). Both the employer and the employee pay
the two taxes on behalf of the employee.
More recent health-care legislation, the Affordable Care Act (ACA), requires an additional medicare tax
withholding from employee pay of 0.9% for individuals who exceed an income threshold based on their filing
status (married, single, or head of household, for example). This Additional Medicare Tax withholding is only
applied to employee payroll.

Figure 12.16

FICA Social Security and FICA Medicare Taxes. Deductions to payroll include FICA Social Security

and FICA Medicare taxes. (credit: modification of work by California Tax Service Center, State of California/
CA.gov, Public Domain)
Last, involuntary deductions may also include child support payments, IRS federal tax levies, court-ordered

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

781

wage garnishments, and bankruptcy judgments. All involuntary deductions are an employer’s liability until
they are paid.

Voluntary Deductions
In addition to involuntary deductions, employers may withhold certain voluntary deductions from employee
wages. Voluntary deductions are not required to be removed from employee pay unless the employee
designates reduction of these amounts. Voluntary deductions may include, but are not limited to, health-care
coverage, life insurance, retirement contributions, charitable contributions, pension funds, and union dues.
Employees can cover the full cost of these benefits or they may cost-share with the employer.
Health-care coverage is a requirement for many businesses to provide as a result of the ACA. Employers may
provide partial benefit coverage and request the employee to pay the remainder. For example, the employer
would cover 30% of health-care cost, and 70% would be the employee’s responsibility.
Retirement contributions may include those made to an employer-sponsored plan, such as a defined
contribution plan, which “shelters” the income in a 401(k) or a 403(b). In simple terms, a defined contribution
plan allows an employee to voluntarily contribute a specified amount or percentage of his or her pretax wages
to a special account in order to defer the tax on those earnings. Usually, a portion of the employee’s
contribution is matched by his or her employer; employers often use this as an incentive to attract and keep
highly skilled and valuable employees. Only when the employee eventually withdraws funds from the plan will
he or she be required to pay the tax on those earnings. Because the amount contributed to the plan is not
immediately taxed by the IRS, it enables the employee to accumulate funds for his or her retirement. This
deferred income may be excluded from the employee’s current federal taxable income but not FICA taxes. All
voluntary deductions are considered employer liabilities until remitted. For more in-depth information on
retirement planning, and using a 401(k) or a 403(b), refer to Appendix C.

Figure 12.17

Retirement Savings. Defined contribution plans can help you save for retirement. (credit:

modification of “Money Coin Investment” by “nattanan23”/Pixabay, CC0)

782

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

As with involuntary deductions, voluntary deductions are held as a current liability until paid. When payroll is
disbursed, journal entries are required.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Should You Start Saving for Retirement?
Should you save for retirement now or wait? As a student, you may be inclined to put off saving for
retirement for many reasons. You may not be in a financial position to do so, you believe Social Security
will be enough to cover your needs, or you may not have even thought about it up to this point.
According to a 2012 survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, of those who had access to a defined
contribution plan, only 68% of employees contributed to their retirement plan. Many employees wait
until their mid-thirties or forties to begin saving, and this can delay retirement, or may leave the retiree
unable to cover his or her annual expenses. Some pitfalls contributing to this lack of saving are shortterm negative spending practices such as high-interest loan debt, credit card purchases, and
discretionary spending (optional expenses such as eating out or entertainment). To avoid these hazards,
you should
1. Analyze your spending habits and make changes where possible.
2. Develop a financial plan with the help of a finance specialist.
3. Join a defined contribution plan and stick with the plan (do not withdraw funds early).
4. Try to contribute at least as much as your employer is willing to match.
5. Consider other short-term savings options like bonds, or high-interest bank accounts.
6. Have a specific savings goal for your retirement account. For example, many financial advisors
recommend saving at least 15% of your monthly income for retirement. However, they usually
include both the employee’s contribution and the employer’s. For example, assume that the
company matches each dollar invested by the employee with a $0.50 contribution from the
employer, up to 8% for the employee. In this case, if the employee contributes 8% and the company
provides 4%, that takes the employee to 80% of the recommended goal (12% of the recommended
15%).
Remember, the longer you wait to begin investing, the more you will have to save later on to have
enough for retirement.

Journal Entries to Report Employee Compensation and Deductions
We continue to use Sierra Sports as our example company to prepare journal entries.
Sierra Sports employs several people, but our focus is on one specific employee for this example. Billie Sanders
works for Sierra Sports and earns a salary each month of $2,000. She claims two withholdings allowances (see
Figure 12.15). This amount is paid on the first of the following month. Withholdings for federal and state
income taxes are assessed in the amount of $102 and $25, respectively. FICA Social Security is taxed at the
6.2% rate, and FICA Medicare is taxed at the 1.45% rate. Billie has voluntary deductions for health insurance
and a 401(k) retirement contribution. She is responsible for 40% of her $500 health-care insurance premium;

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

783

Sierra Sports pays the remaining 60% (as explained in employer payroll). The 401(k) contributions total $150.
The first entry records the salaries liability during the month of August.

Salaries Expense is an equity account used to recognize the accumulated (accrued) expense to the business
during August (increase on the debit side). Salaries Expense represents the employee’s gross income (pay)
before any deductions. Each deduction liability is listed in its own account; this will help for ease of payment to
the different entities. Note that Health Insurance Payable is in the amount of $200, which is 40% of the
employee’s responsibility for the premium ($500 × 0.40 = $200). Salaries Payable represents net income (pay)
or the “take-home pay” for Billie. Salaries Payable is $1,370, which is found by taking gross income and
subtracting the sum of the liabilities ($2,000 – $630 = $1,370). Since salaries are not paid until the first of the
following month, this liability will remain during the month of August. All liabilities (payables) increase due to
the company’s outstanding debt (increase on the credit side).
The second entry records cash payment of accumulated salaries on September 1.

Payment to Billie Sanders occurs on September 1. The payment is for salaries accumulated from the month of
August. The payment decreases Salaries Payable (debit side) since the liability was paid and decreases Cash
(credit side), because cash is the asset used for payment.

LINK TO LEARNING
The IRS has developed a simulation database with twenty different taxpayer simulations
(https://openstax.org/l/50TaxSim) to help taxpayers understand their tax returns and withholdings.

Employer Compensation and Deductions
At this point you might be asking yourself, “why am I having to pay all of this money and my employer isn’t?”
Your employer also has a fiscal and legal responsibility to contribute and match funds to certain payroll liability
accounts.

784

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Involuntary Payroll Taxes
Employers must match employee contributions to FICA Social Security (6.2% rate) on the first $127,200 of
employee wages for 2017, and FICA Medicare (1.45% rate) on all employee earnings. Withholdings for these
taxes are forwarded to the same place as employee contributions; thus, the same accounts are used when
recording journal entries.
Employers are required by law to pay into an unemployment insurance system that covers employees in case
of job disruption due to factors outside of their control (job elimination from company bankruptcy, for
example). The tax recognizing this required payment is the Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA). FUTA is
at a rate of 6%. This tax applies to the initial $7,000 of each employee’s wages earned during the year. This rate
may be reduced by as much as 5.4% as a credit for paying into state unemployment on time, producing a
lower rate of 0.6%. The State Unemployment Tax Act (SUTA) is similar to the FUTA process, but tax rates and
minimum taxable earnings vary by state.

Figure 12.18

Unemployment Support. Two common employer payroll deductions are federal and state

unemployment taxes. (credit: “Laptop” by Unknown/pxhere, CC0)

Voluntary Benefits Provided by the Employer
Employers offer competitive advantages (benefits) to employees in an effort to improve job satisfaction and
increase employee morale. There is no statute mandating the employer cover these benefits financially. Some
possible benefits are health-care coverage, life insurance, contributions to retirement plans, paid sick leave,
paid maternity/paternity leave, and vacation compensation.
Paid sick leave, paid maternity/paternity leave, and vacation compensation help employees take time off when
needed or required by providing a stipend while the employee is away. This compensation is often comparable
to the wages or salary for the covered period. Some companies have policies that require vacation and paid
sick leave to be used within the year or the employee risks losing that benefit in the current period. These
benefits are considered estimated liabilities since it is not clear when, if, or how much the employee will use
them. Let’s now see the process for journalizing employer compensation and deductions.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Figure 12.19

785

Employer-Provided Benefit. Providing employees with vacation benefits can increase job

satisfaction. (credit: “Ellie relaxes by the palm tree” Darren Foreman/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Journal Entries to Report Employer Compensation and Deductions
In addition to the employee payroll entries for Billie Sanders, Sierra Sports has an obligation to contribute
taxes to federal unemployment, state unemployment, FICA Social Security, and FICA Medicare. They are also
responsible for 60% of Billie’s health insurance premium payment. Assume Sierra Sports receives the FUTA
credit and is only taxed at the rate of 0.6%, and SUTA taxes are $100. August is Billie Sanders’ first month of
pay for the year. The following entry represents the employer payroll liabilities and expense for the month of
August. The second entry records the health insurance premium liability.

Employer Payroll Tax Expense is the equity account used to recognize payroll expenses during the period
(increases on the debit side). The amount of $265 is the sum of all liabilities from that period. Notice that FICA
Social Security Tax Payable and FICA Medicare Tax Payable were used in the employee payroll entry earlier and
again here in the employer payroll. You only need to use one account if the payments are for the same
recipient and purpose. The amounts of Social Security ($124) and Medicare ($29) taxes withheld match the
amounts withheld from employee payroll. Federal Unemployment Tax Payable and State Unemployment Tax
Payable recognize the liabilities for federal and state unemployment deductions, respectively. The federal

786

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

unemployment tax ($12) is computed by multiplying the federal unemployment tax rate of 0.6% by $2,000.
These liability accounts increase (credit side) when the amount owed increases.
The second entry recognizes the liability created from providing the voluntary benefit, health insurance
coverage. Voluntary and involuntary employer payroll items should be separated. It is also important to
separate estimated liabilities from certain voluntary benefits due to their uncertainty. Benefits Expense
recognizes the health insurance expense from August. Health Insurance Payable recognizes the outstanding
liability for health-care coverage covered by the employer ($500 × 60% = $300).
The following entries represent payment of the employer payroll and benefit liabilities in the following period.

When payment occurs, all payable accounts decrease (debit) because the company paid all taxes and benefits
owed for those liabilities. Cash is the accepted form of payment at the payee organizations (Social Security
Administration, and health plan administrator, for example).

LINK TO LEARNING
The IRS oversees all tax-related activities on behalf of the US Department of the Treasury. In an effort to
assist taxpayers with determining amounts they may owe, the IRS has established a withholdings
calculator (https://openstax.org/l/50WitholdCalc) that can let an employee know if he or she needs to
submit a new W-4 form to the employer based on the results.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

787

Key Terms
account payable account for financial obligations to suppliers after purchasing products or services on
credit
Additional Medicare Tax requirement for employers to withhold 0.9% from employee pay for individuals
who exceed an income threshold based on their filing status
contingency current situation, where the outcome is unknown or uncertain and will not be resolved until a
future point in time
contingent liability uncertain outcome to a current condition that could produce a future debt or negative
obligation for the company
current liability debt or obligation due within one year or, in rare cases, a company’s standard operating
cycle, whichever is greater
current portion of a note payable portion of a long-term note due during the company’s current operating
period
defined contribution plans money set aside and held in account for employee’s retirement with possible
contribution from employers
federal income tax withholding amount withheld from employee pay based on employee responses given
on Form W-4
Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) tax involuntary tax mandated by FICA that requires employers
to withhold taxes from employee wages “to provide benefits for retirees, the disabled, and children”
Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) response to a law requiring employers to pay into a federal
unemployment insurance system that covers employees in case of job disruption due to factors outside of
their control
gross income (pay) amount earned by the employee before any reductions in pay occur due to involuntary
and voluntary deductions
interest monetary incentive to the lender, which justifies loan risk; interest is paid to the lender by the
borrower
involuntary deduction withholding that neither the employer nor the employee have control over, and is
required by law
likelihood of occurrence contingent liability must be recognized and disclosed if there is a probable liability
determination before the preparation of financial statements has occurred
local income tax withholding applied to those living or working within a jurisdiction to cover schooling,
social services, park maintenance, and law enforcement
measurement requirement company’s ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss
Medicare tax rate currently 1.45% of employee gross income with no taxable earnings cap
net income (pay) (also, take home pay) remaining employee earnings balance after involuntary and
voluntary deductions from employee pay
note payable legal document between a borrower and a lender specifying terms of a financial arrangement;
in most situations, the debt is long-term
principal initial borrowed amount of a loan, not including interest; also, face value or maturity value of a
bond (the amount to be paid at maturity)
probable and estimable contingent liability is likely to occur and can be reasonably estimated
probable and inestimable contingent liability is likely to occur but cannot be reasonably estimated
reasonably possible contingent liability could occur but is not probable
remote contingent liability is unlikely to occur

788

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

short-term note payable debt created and due within a company’s operating period (less than a year)
Social Security tax rate currently 6.2% of employees gross wage earnings with a maximum taxable earnings
amount of $127,200 in 2017 and $128,400 in 2018
state income tax withholding reduction to employee pay determined by responses given on Form W-4, or
on a state withholdings certificate
State Unemployment Tax Act (SUTA) response to a law requiring employers to pay into a state
unemployment insurance system that covers employees in case of job disruption due to factors outside of
their control
taxes payable liability created when a company collects taxes on behalf of employees and customers
unearned revenue advance payment for a product or service that has yet to be provided by the company;
the transaction is a liability until the product or service is provided
vacation compensation stipend provided by the employer to employees when they take time off for
vacation
voluntary deduction not required to be removed from employee pay unless the employee designates
reduction of this amount

Summary
12.1 Identify and Describe Current Liabilities
• Current liabilities are debts or obligations that arise from past business activities and are due for payment
within a company’s operating period (one year). Common examples of current liabilities include accounts
payable, unearned revenue, the current portion of a noncurrent note payable, and taxes payable.
• Accounts payable is used to record purchases from suppliers on credit. Accounts payable typically does
not include interest payments.
• Unearned revenue is recorded when customers pay in advance for products or services before receiving
their benefits. The company maintains the liability until services or products are rendered.
• Notes payable is a debt to a lender with specific repayment terms, which can include principal and
interest. Interest accrued can be computed with the annual interest rate, principal loan amount, and
portion of the year accrued.
• Employers withhold taxes from employees and customers for payment to government agencies at a later
date, but within the business operating period. Common taxes are sales tax and federal, state, and local
income taxes.
12.2 Analyze, Journalize, and Report Current Liabilities
• When the merchandiser initially pays the supplier on credit, it increases both Accounts Payable (a credit)
and the appropriate merchandise Inventory account (a debit). When the amount due is later paid, it
decreases both Accounts Payable (a debit) and Cash (a credit).
• When the company collects payment from a customer in advance of providing a product or service, it
increases both Unearned Revenue (a credit) and Cash (a debit). When the company provides the product
or service, Unearned Revenue decreases (a debit), and Revenue increases (a credit) to realize the amount
earned.
• To recognize payment of the current portion of a noncurrent note payable, both Notes Payable and Cash
would decrease, resulting in a debit and a credit, respectively. To recognize interest accumulation, both
Interest Expense and Interest Payable would increase, resulting in a debit and a credit, respectively.
• To recognize sales tax in the initial sale to a customer, Cash or Accounts Receivable increases (a debit),
and Sales Tax Payable increases (a credit), as does Sales (a credit). When the company remits the sales tax

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

789

payment to the governing body, Sales Tax Payable decreases (a debit), as does Cash (a credit).
12.3 Define and Apply Accounting Treatment for Contingent Liabilities
• Contingent liabilities arise from a current situation with an uncertain outcome that may occur in the
future. Contingent liabilities may include litigation, warranties, insurance claims, and bankruptcy.
• Two FASB recognition requirements must be met before declaring a contingent liability. There must be a
probable likelihood of occurrence, and the loss amount is reasonably estimated.
• The four contingent liability treatments are probable and estimable, probable and inestimable,
reasonably possible, and remote.
• Recognition in financial statements, as well as a note disclosure, occurs when the outcome is probable
and estimable. Probable and not estimable and reasonably possible outcomes require note disclosures
only. There is not recognition or note disclosure for a remote outcome.
12.4 Prepare Journal Entries to Record Short-Term Notes Payable
• Short-term notes payable is a debt created and due within a company’s operating period (less than a
year). This debt includes a written promise to pay principal and interest.
• If a company does not pay for its purchases within a specified time frame, a supplier will convert the
accounts payable into a short-term note payable with interest. When the company pays the amount
owed, short-term notes payable and Cash will decrease, while interest expense increases.
• A company may borrow from a bank because it does not have enough cash on hand to pay for a capital
expenditure or cover temporary expenses. The loan will consist of short-term repayment with interest,
affecting short-term notes payable, cash, and interest expense.
12.5 Record Transactions Incurred in Preparing Payroll
• An employee’s net income (pay) results from gross income (pay) minus any involuntary and voluntary
deductions. Employee payroll deductions may include federal, state, and local income taxes; FICA Social
Security; FICA Medicare; and voluntary deductions such as health insurance, retirement plan
contributions, and union dues.
• When recording employee payroll liabilities, Salaries Expense, Salaries Payable, and all payables for
income taxes, Social Security, Medicare, and voluntary deductions, are reported. When the company pays
the accrued salaries, Salaries Payable is reduced, as is cash.
• Employers are required to match employee withholdings for Social Security and Medicare. They must also
remit FUTA and SUTA taxes, as well as voluntary deductions and benefits provided to employees.
• When recording employer payroll liabilities, Employer Payroll Taxes Expense and all payables associated
with FUTA, SUTA, Social Security, Medicare, and voluntary deductions are required. When the company
pays all employer liabilities, each payable and cash account decreases.

Multiple Choice
1.

12.1 Which of the following is not considered a current liability?
A.

Accounts Payable

B.

Unearned Revenue

C.

the component of a twenty-year note payable due in year 20

D.

current portion of a noncurrent note payable

790

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

2.

12.1 A company regularly purchases materials from a manufacturer on credit. Payments for these

purchases occur within the company’s operating cycle. They do not include interest and are established with
an invoice outlining purchase details, credit terms, and shipping charges. Which current liability situation does
this best describe?
A.

sales tax payable

B.

accounts payable

C.

unearned revenue

D.

income taxes payable

3.

12.1 The following is selected financial data from Block Industries:

How much does Block Industries have in current liabilities?
A.

$19,800

B.

$18,300

C.

$12,300

D.

$25,800

4.

12.1 A ski company takes out a $400,000 loan from a bank. The bank requires eight equal repayments of

the loan principal, paid annually. Assume no interest is paid or accumulated on the loan until the final
repayment. How much of the loan principal is considered a current portion of a noncurrent note payable in
year 3?
A.

$50,000

B.

$150,000

C.

$100,000

D.

$250,000

5.

12.2 Nido Co. has a standing agreement with a supplier for purchasing car parts. The terms of the

agreement are 3/15, n/30 from the invoice date of September 1. The company makes a purchase on
September 1 for $5,000 and pays the amount due on September 13. What amount does Nido Co. pay in cash
on September 13?
A.

$5,000

B.

$4,850

C.

$150

D.

$4,250

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

6.

791

12.2 A client pays cash in advance for a magazine subscription to Living Daily. Living Daily has yet to

provide the magazine to the client. What accounts would Living Daily use to recognize this advance payment?
A.

unearned subscription revenue, cash

B.

cash, subscription revenue

C.

subscription revenue, unearned subscription revenue

D.

unearned subscription revenue, subscription revenue, cash

7.

12.2 Lime Co. incurs a $4,000 note with equal principal installment payments due for the next eight

years. What is the amount of the current portion of the noncurrent note payable due in the second year?
A.

$800

B.

$1,000

C.

$500

D.

nothing, since this is a noncurrent note payable

8.

12.3 Which of the following best describes a contingent liability that is likely to occur but cannot be

reasonably estimated?
A.

reasonably possible

B.

probable and estimable

C.

probable and inestimable

D.

remote

9.

12.3 Blake Department Store sells television sets with one-year warranties that cover repair and

replacement of television parts. In the month of June, Blake sells forty television sets with a per unit cost of
$500. If Blake estimates warranty fulfillment at 10% of sales, what would be the warranty liability reported in
June?
A.

$1,000

B.

$2,000

C.

$500

D.

$20,000

10.

12.3 What accounts are used to record a contingent warranty liability that is probable and estimable but

has yet to be fulfilled?
A.

warranty liability and cash

B.

warranty expense and cash

C.

warranty liability and warranty expense, cash

D.

warranty expense and warranty liability

11.

12.3 Which of the following best describes a contingent liability that is unlikely to occur?
A.

remote

B.

probable and estimable

C.

reasonably possible

D.

probable and inestimable

12.

12.4 Which of the following accounts are used when a short-term note payable with 5% interest is

honored (paid)?
A.

short-term notes payable, cash

B.

short-term notes payable, cash, interest expense

C.

interest expense, cash

D.

short-term notes payable, interest expense, interest payable

792

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

13.

12.4 Which of the following is not a characteristic of a short-term note payable?
A.

Payment is due in less than a year.

B.

It bears interest.

C.

It can result from an accounts payable conversion.

D.

It is reported on the balance sheet under noncurrent liabilities.

14.

12.4 Sunlight Growers borrows $250,000 from a bank at a 4% annual interest rate. The loan is due in

three months. At the end of the three months, the company pays the amount due in full. How much did the
company remit to the bank?
A.

$250,000

B.

$10,000

C.

$252,500

D.

$2,500

15.

12.4 Marathon Peanuts converts a $130,000 account payable into a short-term note payable, with an

annual interest rate of 6%, and payable in four months. How much interest will Marathon Peanuts owe at the
end of four months?
A.

$2,600

B.

$7,800

C.

$137,800

D.

$132,600

16.

12.5 An employee earns $8,000 in the first pay period. The FICA Social Security Tax rate is 6.2%, and the

FICA Medicare tax rate is 1.45%. What is the employee’s FICA taxes responsibility?
A.

$535.50

B.

$612

C.

None, only the employer pays FICA taxes

D.

$597.50

E.

$550

17.

12.5 Which of the following is considered an employer payroll tax?
A.

FICA Medicare

B.

FUTA

C.

SUTA

D.

A and B only

E.

B and C only

F.

A, B, and C

18.

12.5 Employees at Rayon Enterprises earn one day a month of vacation compensation (twelve days total

each year). Vacation compensation is paid at an hourly rate of $45, based on an eight-hour work day. Rayon’s
first pay period is January. It is now April 30, how much vacation liability has accumulated if the company has
four employees and no vacation compensation has been paid?
A.

$1,440

B.

$4,320

C.

$5,760

D.

$7,200

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

19.

793

12.5 An employee and employer cost-share health insurance. If the employee covers three-fourths of

the cost and the employer covers the rest, what would be the employee’s responsibility if the total premium
was $825?
A.

$618.75

B.

$206.25

C.

$412.50

D.

$275

Questions
1.

12.1 Why is Accounts Payable classified as a current liability?

2.

12.1 On which financial statement are current liabilities reported?

3.

12.1 What is the difference between a noncurrent liability and a current liability?

4.

12.1 How is the sales tax rate usually determined? Does the company get to keep the sales tax as earned

revenue?
5.

12.2 If Bergen Air Systems takes out a $100,000 loan, with eight equal principal payments due over the

next eight years, how much will be accounted for as a current portion of a noncurrent note payable each
year?
6.

12.2 What amount is payable to a state tax board if the original sales price is $3,000, and the tax rate is

3.5%?
7.

12.2 What specific accounts are recognized when a business purchases equipment on credit?

8.

12.3 What is a contingent liability?

9.

12.3 What are the two FASB required conditions for a contingent liability to be recognized?

10.

12.3 If a bankruptcy is deemed likely to occur and is reasonably estimated, what would be the

recognition and disclosure requirements for the company?
11.

12.3 Name the four contingent liability treatments.

12.

12.3 A company’s sales for January are $250,000. If the company projects warranty obligations to be 5%

of sales, what is the warranty liability amount for January?
13.

12.4 What is a key difference between a short-term note payable and a current portion of a noncurrent

note payable?
14.

12.4 What business circumstance could bring about a short-term note payable created from a

purchase?
15.

12.4 What business circumstance could produce a short-term notes payable created from a loan?

16.

12.4 Jain Enterprises honors a short-term note payable. Principal on the note is $425,000, with an annual

interest rate of 3.5%, due in 6 months. What journal entry is created when Jain honors the note?
17.

12.5 What are examples of involuntary deductions employers are required to collect for employee and

employer payroll liabilities?

794

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

18.

12.5 What are the tax rates for FICA Social Security and FICA Medicare? What are the maximum taxable

earnings amounts for each of these taxes?
19.

12.5 What are FUTA and SUTA taxes? Is there any possible reduction in the FUTA tax rate? If so, what is

the reduction, and how is this determined?
20.

12.5 Use Figure 12.15 as a reference to answer the following questions.
A.

If an employee makes $1,400 per month and files as single with no withholding allowances, what would
be his monthly income tax withholding?

B.

What would it be if an employee makes $2,500 per month and files as single with two withholding
allowances?

Exercise Set A
EA1.

12.1 Campus Flights takes out a bank loan in the amount of $200,500 on March 1. The terms of the

loan include a repayment of principal in ten equal installments, paid annually from March 1. The annual
interest rate on the loan is 8%, recognized on December 31. (Round answers to the nearest whole dollar if
needed.)
A.

Compute the interest recognized as of December 31 in year 1 rounded to the whole dollar.

B.

Compute the principal due in year 1.

EA2.

12.1 Consider the following accounts and determine if the account is a current liability, a noncurrent

liability, or neither.
A.

cash

B.

federal income tax payable this year

C.

long-term note payable

D.

current portion of a long-term note payable

E.

note payable due in four years

F.

interest expense

G.

state income tax

EA3.

12.1 Lamplight Plus sells lamps to consumers. The company contracts with a supplier who provides

them with lamp fixtures. There is an agreement that Lamplight Plus is not required to provide cash payment
immediately and instead will provide payment within thirty days of the invoice date.
Additional information:
• Lamplight purchases thirty light fixtures for $20 each on August 1, invoice date August 1, with no
discount terms
• Lamplight returns ten light fixtures (receiving a credit amount for the total purchase price per fixture of
$20 each) on August 3.
• Lamplight purchases an additional fifteen light fixtures for $15 each on August 19, invoice date August
19, with no discount terms.
• Lamplight pays $100 toward its account on August 22.
What amount does Lamplight Plus still owe to the supplier on August 30? What account is used to recognize
this outstanding amount?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

EA4.

795

12.2 Review the following transactions and prepare any necessary journal entries for Olinda Pet

Supplies.
A.

On March 2, Olinda Pet Supplies receives advance cash payment from a customer for forty dog food
dishes (from their Dish inventory), costing $25 each. Olinda had yet to supply the dog food bowls as of
March 2.

B.
EA5.

On April 4, Olinda provides all of the dog food bowls to the customer.
12.2 Review the following transactions and prepare any necessary journal entries for Tolbert

Enterprises.
A.

On April 7, Tolbert Enterprises contracts with a supplier to purchase 300 water bottles for their
merchandise inventory, on credit, for $10 each. Credit terms are 2/10, n/60 from the invoice date of
April 7.

B.
EA6.

On April 15, Tolbert pays the amount due in cash to the supplier.
12.2 Elegant Electronics sells a cellular phone on September 2 for $450. On September 6, Elegant sells

another cellular phone for $500. Sales tax is computed at 3.5% of the total sale. Prepare journal entries for
each sale, including sales tax, and the remittance of all sales tax to the tax board on October 23.
EA7.

12.2 Homeland Plus specializes in home goods and accessories. In order for the company to expand

its business, the company takes out a long-term loan in the amount of $650,000. Assume that any loans are
created on January 1. The terms of the loan include a periodic payment plan, where interest payments are
accumulated each year but are only computed against the outstanding principal balance during that current
period. The annual interest rate is 8.5%. Each year on December 31, the company pays down the principal
balance by $80,000. This payment is considered part of the outstanding principal balance when computing the
interest accumulation that also occurs on December 31 of that year.
A.

Determine the outstanding principal balance on December 31 of the first year that is computed for
interest.

B.

Compute the interest accrued on December 31 of the first year.

C.

Make a journal entry to record interest accumulated during the first year, but not paid as of December
31 of that first year.

EA8.

12.2 Bhakti Games is a chain of board game stores. Record entries for the following transactions

related to Bhakti’s purchase of inventory.
A.

On October 5, Bhakti purchases and receives inventory from XYZ Entertainment for $5,000 with credit
terms of 2/10 net 30.

B.

On October 7, Bhakti returns $1,000 worth of the inventory purchased from XYZ.

C.

Bhakti makes payment in full on its purchase from XYZ on October 14.

796

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

EA9.

12.3 Following is the unadjusted trial balance for Sun Energy Co. on December 31, 2017.

You are also given the following supplemental information: A pending lawsuit, claiming $2,700 in damages, is
considered likely to favor the plaintiff and can be reasonably estimated. Sun Energy Co. believes a customer
may win a lawsuit for $3,500 in damages, but the outcome is only reasonably possible to occur. Sun Energy
calculated warranty expense estimates of $210.
A.

Using the unadjusted trial balance and supplemental information for Sun Energy Co., construct an
income statement for the year ended December 31, 2017. Pay particular attention to expenses
resulting from contingencies.

B.

Construct a balance sheet, for December 31, 2017, from the given unadjusted trial balance,
supplemental information, and income statement for Sun Energy Co., paying particular attention to
contingent liabilities.

C.

Prepare any necessary contingent liability note disclosures for Sun Energy Co. Only give one to three
sentences for each contingency note disclosure.

EA10.

12.4 Barkers Baked Goods purchases dog treats from a supplier on February 2 at a quantity of 6,000

treats at $1 per treat. Terms of the purchase are 2/10, n/30. Barkers pays half the amount due in cash on
February 28 but cannot pay the remaining balance due in four days. The supplier renegotiates the terms on
March 4 and allows Barkers to convert its purchase payment into a short-term note, with an annual interest
rate of 6%, payable in 9 months.
Show the entries for the initial purchase, the partial payment, and the conversion.
EA11.

12.4 Use information from EA10. Compute the interest expense due when Barkers honors the note.

Show the journal entry to recognize payment of the short-term note on December 4.
EA12.

12.4 Scrimiger Paints wants to upgrade its machinery and on September 20 takes out a loan from the

bank in the amount of $500,000. The terms of the loan are 2.9% annual interest rate and payable in 8 months.
Interest is due in equal payments each month.
Compute the interest expense due each month. Show the journal entry to recognize the interest payment on
October 20, and the entry for payment of the short-term note and final interest payment on May 20. Round to
the nearest cent if required.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

EA13.

797

12.5 Following are payroll deductions for Mars Co. Classify each payroll deduction as either a

voluntary or involuntary deduction. Record a (V) for voluntary and an (I) for involuntary.
Payroll Deductions
Payroll Deduction

Voluntary (V) or Involuntary (I)?

FICA Social Security Tax
Vacation pay
401(k) retirement plan contribution
Charitable contributions
Federal Unemployment Tax (FUTA)
Health insurance plan contribution
FICA Medicare Tax
State Unemployment Tax (SUTA)
Table 12.3
EA14.

12.5 Toren Inc. employs one person to run its solar management company. The employee’s gross

income for the month of May is $6,000. Payroll for the month of May is as follows: FICA Social Security tax rate
at 6.2%, FICA Medicare tax rate at 1.45%, federal income tax of $400, state income tax of $75, health-care
insurance premium of $200, and union dues of $50. The employee is responsible for covering 30% of his or her
health insurance premium.
A.

Record the journal entry to recognize employee payroll for the month of May, dated May 31, 2017.

B.

Record remittance of the employee’s salary with cash on June 1.

EA15.

12.5 In EA14, you prepared the journal entries for the employee of Toren Inc. You have now been

given the following additional information:
• May is the first pay period for this employee. FUTA taxes are 0.6% and SUTA taxes are 5.4% of the first
$7,000 paid to the employee. FICA Social Security and FICA Medicare match employee deductions. The
employer is responsible for 70% of the health insurance premium.
Using the information from EA14 and the additional information provided:
A.

Record the employer payroll for the month of May, dated May 31, 2017.

B.

Record the payment in cash of all employer liabilities only on June 1.

EA16.

12.5 An employee and employer cost-share pension plan contributions and health insurance

premium payments. If the employee covers 35% of the pension plan contribution and 25% of the health
insurance premium, what would be the employee’s total benefits responsibility if the total pension
contribution was $900, and the health insurance premium was $375?
Include the journal entry representing the payroll benefits accumulation for the employer in the month of
February.

798

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

12.1 Everglades Consultants takes out a loan in the amount of $375,000 on April 1. The terms of the

loan include a repayment of principal in eight, equal installments, paid annually from the April 1 date. The
annual interest rate on the loan is 5%, recognized on December 31. (Round answers to the nearest cent, if
needed.)
A.

Compute the interest recognized as of December 31 in year 1.

B.

Compute the principal due in year 1.

EB2.

12.1 Match each of the following accounts with the appropriate transaction or description.

A. Sales Tax Payable

i. A customer pays in advance for services

B. Income Taxes Payable

ii. A risk incentive rate for a loan

C. Current portion of a long-term note payable

iii. State withholding from an employee’s paycheck

D. Interest Payable

iv. The portion of a note due within the operating period

E. Accounts Payable

v. A credit line between a purchaser and a supplier

F. Unearned Revenue

vi. Extra tax collected on the sale of a product

EB3.

12.1 Pianos Unlimited sells pianos to customers. The company contracts with a supplier who provides

it with replacement piano keys. There is an agreement that Pianos Unlimited is not required to provide cash
payment immediately, and instead will provide payment within thirty days of the invoice date.
Additional information:
• Pianos Unlimited purchases 400 piano keys for $7 each on September 1, invoice date September 1, with
discount terms 2/10, n/30.
• Pianos Unlimited returns 150 piano keys (receiving a credit amount for the total purchase price per key
of $7 each) on September 8.
• The company purchases an additional 230 keys for $5 each on September 15, invoice date September
15, with no discount terms.
• The company pays 50% of the total amount due to the supplier on September 24.
What amount does Pianos Unlimited still owe to the supplier on September 30? What account is used to
recognize this outstanding amount?
EB4.

12.2 Review the following transactions and prepare any necessary journal entries for Bernard Law

Offices.
A.

On June 1, Bernard Law Offices receives an advance cash payment of $4,500 from a client for three
months of legal services.

B.
EB5.
A.

On July 31, Bernard recognizes legal services provided.
12.2 Review the following transactions and prepare any necessary journal entries for Lands Inc.
On December 10, Lands Inc. contracts with a supplier to purchase 450 plants for its merchandise
inventory, on credit, for $12.50 each. Credit terms are 4/15, n/30 from the invoice date of December 10.

B.

On December 28, Lands pays the amount due in cash to the supplier.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

EB6.

799

12.2 Monster Drinks sells twenty-four cases of beverages on October 18 for $120 per case. On October

25, Monster sells another thirty-five cases for $140 per case. Sales tax is computed at 4% of the total sale.
Prepare journal entries for each sale, including sales tax, and the remittance of all sales tax to the tax board on
November 5.
EB7.

12.2 McMasters Inc. specializes in BBQ accessories. In order for the company to expand its business,

they take out a long-term loan in the amount of $800,000. Assume that any loans are created on January 1. The
terms of the loan include a periodic payment plan, where interest payments are accumulated each year but
are only computed against the outstanding principal balance during that current period. The annual interest
rate is 9%. Each year on December 31, the company pays down the principal balance by $50,000. This payment
is considered part of the outstanding principal balance when computing the interest accumulation that also
occurs on December 31 of that year.
A.

Determine the outstanding principal balance on December 31 of the first year that is computed for
interest.

B.

Compute the interest accrued on December 31 of the first year.

C.

Make a journal entry to record interest accumulated during the first year, but not paid as of December
31 of that first year.

EB8.

12.3 Following is the unadjusted trial balance for Pens Unlimited on December 31, 2017.

You are also given the following supplemental information: A pending lawsuit, claiming $4,200 in damages, is
considered likely to favor the plaintiff and can be reasonably estimated. Pens Unlimited believes a customer
may win a lawsuit for $5,000 in damages, but the outcome is only reasonably possible to occur. Pens Unlimited
records warranty estimates on the basis of 2% of annual sales revenue.
A.

Using the unadjusted trial balance and supplemental information for Pens Unlimited, construct an
income statement for the year ended December 31, 2017. Pay particular attention to expenses
resulting from contingencies.

B.

Construct a balance sheet, for December 31, 2017, from the given unadjusted trial balance,
supplemental information, and income statement for Pens Unlimited. Pay particular attention to
contingent liabilities.

C.

Prepare any necessary contingent liability note disclosures for Pens Unlimited. Only give one to three
sentences for each contingency note disclosure.

800

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

EB9.

12.4 Airplanes Unlimited purchases airplane parts from a supplier on March 19 at a quantity of 4,800

parts at $12.50 per part. Terms of the purchase are 3/10, n/30. Airplanes pays one-third of the amount due in
cash on March 30 but cannot pay the remaining balance due. The supplier renegotiates the terms on April 18
and allows Airplanes to convert its purchase payment into a short-term note, with an annual interest rate of
9%, payable in six months.
Show the entries for the initial purchase, the partial payment, and the conversion.
EB10.

12.4 Use information from EB9. Compute the interest expense due when Airplanes Unlimited honors

the note. Show the journal entry to recognize payment of the short-term note on October 18.
EB11.

12.4 Whole Leaves wants to upgrade their equipment, and on January 24 the company takes out a

loan from the bank in the amount of $310,000. The terms of the loan are 6.5% annual interest rate, payable in
three months. Interest is due in equal payments each month.
Compute the interest expense due each month. Show the journal entry to recognize the interest payment on
February 24, and the entry for payment of the short-term note and final interest payment on April 24. Round to
the nearest cent if required.
EB12.

12.5 Reference Figure 12.15 and use the following information to complete the requirements.

A.

Determine the federal income tax withholdings amount per monthly pay period for each employee.

B.

Record the employee payroll entry (all employees) for the month of January assuming FICA Social
Security is 6.2%, FICA Medicare is 1.45%, and state income tax is equal to 3% of gross income. (Round to
the nearest cent if necessary.)

EB13.

12.5 Marc & Associates employs Janet Evanovich at its law firm. Her gross income for June is $7,500.

Payroll for the month of June follows: federal income tax of $650, state income tax of $60, local income tax of
$30, FICA Social Security tax rate at 6.2%, FICA Medicare tax rate at 1.45%, health-care insurance premium of
$300, donations to a charity of $50, and pension plan contribution of $200. The employee is responsible for
covering 40% of his or her health insurance premium.
A.

Record the journal entry to recognize employee payroll for the month of June; dated June 30, 2017.

B.

Record remittance of the employee’s salary with cash on July 1.

EB14.

12.5 In EB13, you prepared the journal entries for Janet Evanovich, an employee of Marc & Associates.

You have now been given the following additional information: June is the first pay period for this employee.
FUTA taxes are 0.6% and SUTA taxes are 5.4% of the first $7,000 paid to the employee. FICA Social Security and
FICA Medicare match employee deductions. The employer is responsible for 60% of the health insurance
premium. The employer matches 50% of employee pension plan contributions.
Using the information from EB13 and the additional information provided:
A.

Record the employer payroll for the month of June, dated June 30, 2017.

B.

Record the payment in cash of all employer liabilities only on July 1.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

EB15.

801

12.5 An employee and employer cost-share 401(k) plan contributions, health insurance premium

payments, and charitable donations. The employer also provides annual vacation compensation equal to ten
days of pay at a rate of $30 per hour, eight-hour work day. The employee makes a gross wage of $3,000
monthly. The employee decides to use five days of vacation during the current pay period. Employees cover
30% of the 401(k) plan contribution and 30% of the health insurance premium. The employee also donates 1%
of gross pay to a charitable organization.
A.

What would be the employee’s total benefits responsibility if the total 401(k) contribution is $700 and
the health insurance premium is $260?

B.

Include the journal entry representing the payroll benefits accumulation for the employer in the month
of March, if the employer matches the employee’s charitable donation of 1%.

Problem Set A
PA1.

12.1 Consider the following situations and determine (1) which type of liability should be recognized

(specific account), and (2) how much should be recognized in the current period (year).
A.

A business sets up a line of credit with a supplier. The company purchases $10,000 worth of equipment
on credit. Terms of purchase are 5/10, n/30.

B.

A customer purchases a watering hose for $25. The sales tax rate is 5%.

C.

Customers pay in advance for season tickets to a soccer game. There are fourteen customers, each
paying $250 per season ticket. Each customer purchased two season tickets.

D.
PA2.

A company issues 2,000 shares of its common stock with a price per share of $15.
12.1 Stork Enterprises delivers care packages for special occasions. They charge $45 for a small

package, and $80 for a large package. The sales tax rate is 6%. During the month of May, Stork delivers 38
small packages and 22 large packages.
A.

What is the total tax charged to the customer per small package? What is the overall charge per small
package?

B.

What is the total tax charged to the customer per large package? What is the overall charge per large
package?

C.

How much sales tax liability does Stork Enterprises have for the month of May?

D.

What accounts are used to recognize this tax situation for the month of May?

E.

When Stork remits payment to the sales tax governing body, what happens to the sales tax liability?

PA3.

12.2 Review the following transactions, and prepare any necessary journal entries for Renovation

Goods.
A.

On May 12, Renovation Goods purchases 750 square feet of flooring (Flooring Inventory) at $3.00 per
square foot from a supplier, on credit. Terms of the purchase are 2/10, n/30 from the invoice date of
May 12.

B.

On May 15, Renovation Goods purchases 200 measuring tapes (Tape Inventory) at $5.75 per tape from
a supplier, on credit. Terms of the purchase are 4/15, n/60 from the invoice date of May 15.

C.

On May 22, Renovation Goods pays cash for the amount due to the flooring supplier from the May 12
transaction.

D.

On June 3, Renovation Goods pays cash for the amount due to the tape supplier from the May 15
transaction.

802

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

PA4.

12.2 Review the following transactions, and prepare any necessary journal entries for Juniper

Landscaping Services.
A.

On November 5, Juniper receives advance cash payment from a customer for landscaping services in
the amount of $3,500. Juniper had yet to provide landscaping services as of November 5.

B.

On December 11, Juniper provides all of the landscaping services to the customer from November 5.

C.

On December 14, Juniper receives advance payment from another customer for landscaping services in
the amount of $4,400. Juniper has yet to provide landscaping services as of December 14.

D.

On January 19 of the following year, Juniper provides and recognizes 80% of landscaping services to the
customer from December 14.

PA5.
A.

12.2 Review the following transactions, and prepare any necessary journal entries.
On July 16, Arrow Corp. purchases 200 computers (Equipment) at $500 per computer from a supplier,
on credit. Terms of the purchase are 4/10, n/50 from the invoice date of July 16.

B.

On August 10, Hondo Inc. receives advance cash payment from a client for legal services in the amount
of $9,000. Hondo had yet to provide legal services as of August 10.

C.

On September 22, Jack Pies sells thirty pies for $25 cash per pie. The sales tax rate is 8%.

D.

On November 8, More Supplies paid a portion of their noncurrent note in the amount of $3,250 cash.

PA6.

12.3 Machine Corp. has several pending lawsuits against its company. Review each situation and (1)

determine the treatment for each situation as probable and estimable, probable and inestimable, reasonably
possible, or remote; (2) determine what, if any, recognition or note disclosure is required; and (3) prepare any
journal entries required to recognize a contingent liability.
A.

A pending lawsuit, claiming $100,000 in damages, is considered likely to favor the plaintiff and can be
reasonably estimated.

B.

Machine Corp. believes there might be other potential lawsuits about this faulty machinery, but this is
unlikely to occur.

C.

A claimant sues Machine Corp. for damages, from a dishonored service contract agreement; the
plaintiff will likely win the case but damages cannot be reasonably estimated.

D.

Machine Corp. believes a customer will win a lawsuit it filed, but the outcome is not likely and is not
remote. It is possible the customer will win.

PA7.

12.3 Emperor Pool Services provides pool cleaning and maintenance services to residential clients. It

offers a one-year warranty on all services. Review each of the transactions, and prepare any necessary journal
entries for each situation.
A.

March 31: Emperor provides cleaning services for fifteen pools during the month of March at a sales
price per pool of $550 cash. Emperor records warranty estimates when sales are recognized and bases
warranty estimates on 2% of sales.

B.

April 5: A customer files a warranty claim that Emperor honors in the amount of $100 cash.

C.

April 13: Another customer, J. Jones, files a warranty claim that Emperor does not honor due to
customer negligence.

D.

June 8: J. Jones files a lawsuit requesting damages related to the dishonored warranty in the amount of
$1,500. Emperor determines that the lawsuit is likely to end in the plaintiff’s favor and the $1,500 is a
reasonable estimate for damages.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

PA8.

803

12.4 Serene Company purchases fountains for its inventory from Kirkland Inc. The following

transactions take place during the current year.
A.

On July 3, the company purchases thirty fountains for $1,200 per fountain, on credit. Terms of the
purchase are 2/10, n/30, invoice dated July 3.

B.

On August 3, Serene does not pay the amount due and renegotiates with Kirkland. Kirkland agrees to
convert the debt owed into a short-term note, with an 8% annual interest rate, payable in two months
from August 3.

C.

On October 3, Serene Company pays its account in full.

Record the journal entries to recognize the initial purchase, the conversion, and the payment.
PA9.

12.4 Mohammed LLC is a growing consulting firm. The following transactions take place during the

current year.
A.

On June 10, Mohammed borrows $270,000 from a bank to cover the initial cost of expansion. Terms of
the loan are payment due in four months from June 10, and annual interest rate of 5%.

B.

On July 9, Mohammed borrows an additional $100,000 with payment due in four months from July 9,
and an annual interest rate of 12%.

C.

Mohammed pays their accounts in full on October 10 for the June 10 loan, and on November 9 for the
July 9 loan.

Record the journal entries to recognize the initial borrowings, and the two payments for Mohammed.
PA10.

12.5 Lemur Corp. is going to pay three employees a year-end bonus. The amount of the year-end

bonus and the amount of federal income tax withholding are as follows.

Lemur’s payroll deductions include FICA Social Security at 6.2%, FICA Medicare at 1.45%, FUTA at 0.6%, SUTA at
5.4%, federal income tax as previously shown, state income tax at 5% of gross pay, and 401(k) employee
contributions at 2% of gross pay.
Record the entry for the employee payroll on December 31.
PA11.
Apr. 2

12.5 Record the journal entries for each of the following payroll transactions.
Paid $650 and $340 cash to a federal depository for FICA Social Security and FICA Medicare,
respectively

Apr. 4

Paid accumulated employee salaries of $15,220

Apr. 11

Issued checks in the amounts of $480 for federal income tax and $300 for state income tax to an
IRS-approved bank

Apr. 14

Paid cash to health insurance carrier for total outstanding health insurance liability of $800

Apr. 22

Remitted cash payments for FUTA and SUTA to federal and state unemployment agencies in the
amounts of $130 and $250, respectively

804

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

Problem Set B

B

PB1.

12.1 Consider the following situations and determine (1) which type of liability should be recognized

(specific account), and (2) how much should be recognized in the current period (year).
A.

A business depreciates a building with a book value of $12,000, using straight-line depreciation, no
salvage value, and a remaining useful life of six years.

B.

An organization has a line of credit with a supplier. The company purchases $35,500 worth of inventory
on credit. Terms of purchase are 3/20, n/60.

C.

An employee earns $1,000 in pay and the employer withholds $46 for federal income tax.

D.

A customer pays $4,000 in advance for legal services. The lawyer has previously recognized 30% of the
services as revenue. The remainder is outstanding.

PB2.

12.1 Perfume Depot sells two different tiers of perfume products to customers. They charge $30 for

tier 1 perfume and $100 for tier 2 perfume. The sales tax rate is 4.5%. During the month of October, Perfume
Depot sells 75 tier 1 perfumes, and 60 tier 2 perfumes.
A.

What is the total tax charged to the customer per tier 1 perfume? What is the overall charge per tier 1
category perfume?

B.

What is the total tax charged to the customer per tier 2 perfume? What is the overall charge per tier 2
category perfume?

C.

How much sales tax liability does Perfume Depot have for the month of October?

D.

What accounts are used to recognize this tax situation for the month of October?

E.

When Perfume Depot remits payment to the sales tax governing body, what happens to the sales tax
liability?

PB3.

12.2 Review the following transactions, and prepare any necessary journal entries for Sewing Masters

Inc.
A.

On October 3, Sewing Masters Inc. purchases 800 yards of fabric (Fabric Inventory) at $9.00 per yard
from a supplier, on credit. Terms of the purchase are 1/5, n/40 from the invoice date of October 3.

B.

On October 8, Sewing Masters Inc. purchases 300 more yards of fabric from the same supplier at an
increased price of $9.25 per yard, on credit. Terms of the purchase are 5/10, n/20 from the invoice date
of October 8.

C.

On October 18, Sewing Masters pays cash for the amount due to the fabric supplier from the October 8
transaction.

D.

On October 23, Sewing Masters pays cash for the amount due to the fabric supplier from the October 3
transaction.

PB4.

12.2 Review the following transactions and prepare any necessary journal entries for Woodworking

Magazine. Woodworking Magazine provides one issue per month to subscribers for a service fee of $240 per
year. Assume January 1 is the first day of operations for this company, and no new customers join during the
year.
A.

On January 1, Woodworking Magazine receives advance cash payment from forty customers for
magazine subscription services. Handyman had yet to provide subscription services as of January 1.

B.

On April 30, Woodworking recognizes subscription revenues earned.

C.

On October 31, Woodworking recognizes subscription revenues earned.

D.

On December 31, Woodworking recognizes subscription revenues earned.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

PB5.
A.

805

12.2 Review the following transactions and prepare any necessary journal entries.
On January 5, Bunnet Co. purchases 350 aprons (Supplies) at $25 per apron from a supplier, on credit.
Terms of the purchase are 3/10, n/30 from the invoice date of January 5.

B.

On February 18, Melon Construction receives advance cash payment from a client for construction
services in the amount of $20,000. Melon had yet to provide construction services as of February 18.

C.

On March 21, Noonan Smoothies sells 875 smoothies for $4 cash per smoothie. The sales tax rate is
6.5%.

D.
PB6.

On June 7, Organic Methods paid a portion of their noncurrent note in the amount of $9,340 cash.
12.3 Roundhouse Tools has several potential warranty claims as a result of damaged tool kits. Review

each situation and (1) determine the treatment for each situation as probable and estimable, probable and
inestimable, reasonably possible, or remote; (2) determine what, if any, recognition or note disclosure is
required; and (3) prepare any journal entries required to recognize a contingent liability.
A.

Roundhouse Tools has several claims for replacement of another tool kit not listed as one of their
damaged tool kits. The honored warranty for these tool kits is not likely but is not remote. It is possible.

B.

A pending warranty claim has been received with the projected cost to be $450. Roundhouse Tools
believes honoring that warranty claim is likely to occur and that figure is reasonably estimated.

C.

Roundhouse Tools believes other potential warranties may have to be honored outside of the warranty
period, but this is unlikely to occur.

D.

Warranty replacements will cost the company a percentage of sales for the period. This amount
allotted for warranty replacements cannot be reasonably estimated but is likely to occur.

PB7.

12.3 Shoe Hut sells custom, handmade shoes. It offers a one-year warranty on all shoes for repair or

replacement. Review each of the transactions and prepare any necessary journal entries for each situation.
A.

May 31: Shoe Hut sells 100 pairs of shoes during the month of May at a sales price per pair of shoes of
$240 cash. Shoe Hut records warranty estimates when sales are recognized and bases warranty
estimates on 4% of sales.

B.

June 2: A customer files a warranty claim that Shoe Hut honors in the amount of $30 for repair to laces.
Laces Inventory corresponds to shoelace inventory used for repairs.

C.

June 4: Another customer files a warranty claim that Shoe Hut honors. Shoe Hut replaces the damaged
shoes at a cost of $200, affecting their Shoe Replacement Inventory account.

D.

August 10: Shoe Hut explores the possibility of bankruptcy, given the current economic conditions
(recession). It determines the bankruptcy is unlikely to occur (remote).

PB8.

12.4 Air Compressors Inc. purchases compressor parts for its inventory from a supplier. The following

transactions take place during the current year:
A.

On April 5, the company purchases 400 parts for $8.30 per part, on credit. Terms of the purchase are 4/
10, n/30, invoice dated April 5.

B.

On May 5, Air Compressors does not pay the amount due and renegotiates with the supplier. The
supplier agrees to $400 cash immediately as partial payment on note payable due, converting the debt
owed into a short-term note, with a 7% annual interest rate, payable in three months from May 5.

C.

On August 5, Air Compressors pays its account in full.

Record the journal entries to recognize the initial purchase, the conversion plus cash, and the payment.

806

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

PB9.
A.

12.4 Pickles R Us is a pickle farm located in the Northeast. The following transactions take place:
On November 6, Pickles borrows $820,000 from a bank to cover the initial cost of expansion. Terms of
the loan are payment due in six months from November 6, and annual interest rate of 3%.

B.

On December 12, Pickles borrows an additional $200,000 with payment due in three months from
December 12, and an annual interest rate of 10%.

C.

Pickles pays its accounts in full on March 12, for the December 12 loan, and on May 6 for the November
6 loan.

Record the journal entries to recognize the initial borrowings, and the two payments for Pickles.
PB10.

12.5 Use Figure 12.15 to complete the following problem. Roland Inc. employees’ monthly gross pay

information and their W-4 Form withholding allowances follow.

Roland’s payroll deductions include FICA Social Security at 6.2%, FICA Medicare at 1.45%, FUTA at 0.6%, SUTA at
5.4%, federal income tax (based on withholdings table) of gross pay, state income tax at 3% of gross pay, and
health insurance coverage premiums of $1,000 split 50% employees and 50% employer. Assume each
employee files as single, gross income is the same amount each month, October is the first month of business
operation for the company, and salaries have yet to be paid.
Record the entry or entries for accumulated employee and employer payroll for the month of October; dated
October 31.
PB11.

12.5 Use the information from PB10 to complete this problem. Record entries for each transaction

listed.
Nov. 1

Paid cash to a federal depository for FICA Social Security and FICA Medicare; paid accumulated
salaries

Nov. 3

Remitted cash payment for FUTA and SUTA to federal and state unemployment agencies

Nov. 10

Issued a check to an IRS-approved bank for federal and state income taxes

Nov. 12

Paid cash to health insurance carrier for total outstanding health insurance liability

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

807

Thought Provokers
TP1.

12.1 Research a Major League Baseball team’s season ticket prices. Pick one season ticket price level

and answer the following questions:
• What team did you choose, and what are the ticket prices for a season?
• What is the sales tax rate for the purchase of season tickets?
• How many games are included in the season package?
• What are the refund and exchange policies for purchases?
• What are some benefits to the team with customers paying in advance for season tickets?
• Explain in detail the unearned revenue liability created from season ticket sales.
• When does the team recognize this future revenue as earned?
• What effect does the refund or exchange policy have on the unearned revenue account, and the ability
of the team to recognize revenue?
• If unearned revenue was split equally among all games (not including playoff games), how much
would be recognized per game?
• Explain in detail the sales tax liability created from season ticket sales.
• When does the team collect sales tax?
• What is the final purchase price of the season ticket with sales tax?
• Where does the team recognize the sales tax liability (which statement and account[s])?
• To whom does the team pay the sales tax collected?
• When is sales tax payment required?
TP2.

12.2 Review TP1. Review current season ticket prices for one Major League Baseball team. Choose one

season ticket price area to review.
A.

Determine what is recognized as per ticket revenue after each game is played for your chosen season
ticket price area. Assume an equal amount is distributed per game. Do not include playoff games or
preseason games in your computations. If parking and other amenities are factored into the season
ticket price, please continue to include them in your calculations.

B.

Determine an average attendance figure for this team during the 2016 season for all seating areas, and
per game (assume equal distribution of game attendance), and use this as a projection for future
attendance. You may use Ballparks of Baseball http://www.ballparksofbaseball.com/2010s-ballparkattendance/ for attendance figures.

C.

Assume that attendance is distributed equally between all season ticket areas. Determine the
attendance for your season ticket area for the season and per game.

D.

Determine the total unearned ticket revenue amount before the season begins. Assume all season
ticket holders paid with cash, in full.

E.

Prepare the journal entry to recognize unearned ticket revenue at the beginning of the season for your
chosen season ticket area. Assume all seats are filled by season ticket holders. Show any support
calculations and documentation used.

F.

Prepare the journal entry to recognize ticket revenue earned after the first game is played in your
chosen season ticket area.

G.

Suppose the team only records revenues every three months (at the end of each month), record the
journal entry to recognize the first three months of ticket revenue earned during the season in your
chosen season ticket area.

808

Chapter 12 Current Liabilities

TP3.

12.3 Toyota is a car manufacturer that has issued several recalls over the years. One major recall

centered on faulty air bags from Takata. A prior recall focused on unintentional pedal acceleration. Research
information about the car manufacturer, and one of the two recall situations described. Answer the following
questions:
• What are some of the main points discussed in the supplements you researched?
• What negative impact did this recall have on Toyota?
• As a result of the recall, what contingent liabilities were (or could be) created?
• How did Toyota handle the reporting of these contingent liabilities?
• How did Toyota determine the estimated liability amounts?
• Do you agree with Toyota’s treatment assignment for reported liabilities (probable and estimable,
probable and inestimable, for example)?
• What note disclosures accompanied the recognized contingent liabilities?
• What long-term effect, if any, did the recall have on Toyota’s financials and reputation?
TP4.

12.4 You own a farm and grow seasonal products such as pumpkins, squash, and pine trees. Most of

your business revenues are earned during the months of October to December. The rest of your year supports
the growing process, where revenues are minimal and expenses are high. In order to cover the expenses from
January to September, you consider borrowing a short-term note from a bank for $300,000.
• Research the lending practices of a local bank.
• Determine the interest rate charged for a $300,000 loan.
• What collateral does the bank require to secure the loan?
• Determine your overall payback amount if you were to repay the loan in less than one year. Choose
either a payback with periodic payments or all at the end of the loan term, and compare the outcomes.
• After conducting your research, would you consider borrowing the money?
• What positive and negative outcomes accompany borrowing the money?
TP5.

12.5 Payroll Comparison Research Paper: Search the Internet for local public K–12 school districts,

community colleges, and public universities that publish their employees’ salary (pay) schedules. Also research
any available data on employee benefits provided to each of these schools. Review federal and state taxation
rates on income, unemployment, Social Security, and Medicare. Write a comprehensive paper addressing the
following questions and situations. You must provide scholarly data and source information to support your
claims.
• Which schools did you compare?
• How do the salaries compare for each school entity?
• What voluntary benefits were provided by the employer (school district)?
• What involuntary deductions would be taken out of these salaries?
• What would your federal, state, and local income tax rates be if you worked for one of these schools?
Hint: Choose one of the salaries from the schedule.
• Create a Form W-4 to determine your tax liability.
• Assume you are the employer for your chosen school. Prepare journal entries to record January’s
employee and employer payroll (assume January is the first pay period and you are preparing the entry
for one employee). You must record the liabilities from the January 31 payroll, along with the payment
of these liabilities on February 1.
• Record any observations you have made at the culmination of your research, and connect these
observations to what you’ve learned about current liabilities.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

13

Long-Term Liabilities
Figure 13.1 Car Purchase. Purchasing a vehicle can be an exciting experience. A vehicle is a significant
financial investment and buyers want to ensure they are getting a good value for their money. (credit left:
modification of “Auto” by unknown/Pixabay, CC0; credit right: modification of “Guy” by unknown/Pixabay,
CC0)

Chapter Outline
13.1 Explain the Pricing of Long-Term Liabilities
13.2 Compute Amortization of Long-Term Liabilities Using the Effective-Interest Method
13.3 Prepare Journal Entries to Reflect the Life Cycle of Bonds
13.4 Appendix: Special Topics Related to Long-Term Liabilities

Why It Matters
Olivia is excited to be shopping for her very first car. She has saved up money from birthdays, holidays, and
household chores and would like to get a vehicle so she can get a summer job. Her mother mentioned that a
coworker is selling one of their vehicles.
Olivia and her family decide to go look at the vehicle and take it for a test drive. After inspecting the vehicle
and taking it for a test drive, Olivia decides she would like to purchase the car. Olivia planned on spending up
to $6,000 (the amount that she has saved), but the seller is asking $9,000 for this particular vehicle. Because
the car has been well-maintained and has many extra features, Olivia decides it is worth spending the extra
money in order to get reliable transportation. However, she is not sure how to come up with the additional
$3,000. Olivia’s parents tell her she can get a bank loan of $3,000 to cover the difference, but she will have to
repay the bank more than the $3,000 she is borrowing. This is because the loan will be repaid over a period of
time, say twelve months, and the loan will require that she pay interest in addition to repaying the $3,000 in
principal that she is borrowing. After meeting with the bank and signing the necessary paperwork to secure

810

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

the $3,000 loan, a few days later Olivia returns to the seller with a check for $9,000 and is overjoyed to have
purchased her first vehicle.

13.1

Explain the Pricing of Long-Term Liabilities

Businesses have several ways to secure financing and, in practice, will use a combination of these methods to
finance the business. As you’ve learned, net income does not necessarily mean cash. In some cases, in the
long-run, profitable operations will provide businesses with sufficient cash to finance current operations and
to invest in new opportunities. However, situations might arise where the cash flow generated is insufficient to
cover future anticipated expenses or expansion, and the company might need to secure additional funding.
If the extra amount needed is somewhat temporary or small, a short-term source, such as a loan, might be
appropriate. Short-term (current) liabilities were covered in Current Liabilities. When additional long-term
funding needs arise, a business can choose to sell stock in the company (equity-based financing) or obtain a
long-term liability (debt-based financing), such as a loan that is spread over a period longer than a year.

Types of Long-Term Funding
If a company needs additional funding for a major expenditure, such as expansion, the source of funding
would typically be repaid over several years, or in the case of equity-based financing, over an indefinite period
of time. With equity-based financing, the company sells an interest in the company’s ownership by issuing
shares of the company’s common stock. This financing option is equity financing, and it will be addressed in
detail in Corporation Accounting. Here, we will focus on two major long-term debt-based options: long-term
loans and bonds.
Debt as an option for financing is an important source of funding for businesses. If a company chooses a debtbased option, the business can borrow money on an intermediate (typically two to four years) or long-term
(longer than four years) basis from lenders. In the case of bonds, the funds would be provided by investors.
While loans and bonds are similar in that they borrow money on which the borrower will pay interest and
eventually repay the lenders, they have some important differences. First, a company can raise funds by
borrowing from an individual, bank, or other lender, while a bond is typically sold to numerous investors.
When a company chooses a loan, the business signs what is known as a note, and a legal relationship called a
note payable is created between the borrower and the lender. The document lists the conditions of the
financial arrangement, a fixed predetermined interest rate (or, if the agreement allows, a variable interest
rate), the amount borrowed, the borrowing costs to be charged, and the timing of the payments. In some
cases, companies will secure an interest-only loan, which means that for the life of the loan the organization
pays only the interest expense that has accrued and upon maturity repays the original amount that it
borrowed and still owes. For individuals a student loan, car loan, or a mortgage can all be types of notes
payable. For Olivia’s car purchase in Why It Matters, a document such as a promissory note is typically
created, representing a personal loan agreement between a lender and borrower. Figure 13.2 shows a sample
promissory note that might be used for a simple, relatively intermediate-term loan. If we were considering a
loan that would be repaid over a several-year period the document might be a little more complicated,
although it would still have many of the same components of Olivia’s loan document.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

Figure 13.2

811

Promissary Note. A personal loan agreement is a formal contract between a lender and

borrower. The document lists the conditions of the loan, including the amount borrowed, the borrowing costs
to be charged, and the timing of the payments. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BYNC-SA 4.0 license)
If debt instruments are created with a variable interest rate that can fluctuate up or down, depending upon
predetermined factors, an inflation measurement must also be included in the documentation. The Federal
Funds Rate, for example, is a commonly used tool for potential adjustments in interest rates. To keep our
discussion simple, we will use a fixed interest rate in our subsequent calculations.
Another difference between loans and bonds is that the note payable creates an obligation for the borrower to
repay the lender on a specified date. To demonstrate the mechanics of a loan,with loans, a note payable is
created for the borrower when the loan is initiated. This example assumes the loan will be paid in full by the
maturity or due date. Typically, over the life of the loan, payments will be composed of both principal and
interest components. The principal component paid typically reduces the amount that the borrower owes the
lender. For example, assume that a company borrowed $10,000 from a lender under the following terms: a
five-year life, an annual interest rate of 10%, and five annual payments at the end of the year.
Under these terms, the annual payment would be $2,637.97. The first year’s payment would be allocated to an
interest expense of $1,000, and the remaining amount of the payment would go to reduce the amount
borrowed (principal) by $1,637.97. After the first year’s payment, the company would owe a remaining balance
of $8,362.03 ($10,000 – $1637.97.) Additional detail on this type of calculation will be provided in Compute
Amortization of Long-Term Liabilities Using the Effective-Interest Method.
Typical long-term loans have other characteristics. For example, most long-term notes are held by one entity,

812

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

meaning one party provides all of the financing. If a company bought heavy-duty equipment from Caterpillar,
it would be common for the seller of the equipment to also have a division that would provide the financing
for the transaction. An additional characteristic of a long-term loan is that in many, if not most, situations, the
initial creator of the loan will hold it and receive and process payments until it matures.
Returning to the differences between long-term debt and bonds, another difference is that the process for
issuing (selling) bonds can be very complicated, especially for companies that are subject to regulation. The
bond issue must be approved by the appropriate regulatory agency, and then outside parties such as
investment banks sell the bonds to, typically, a large audience of investors. It is not unusual for several months
to pass between the time that the company’s board of directors approves the bond offering, gets regulatory
approval, and then markets and issues the bonds. This additional time is often the reason that the market rate
for similar bonds in the outside business environment is higher or lower than the stated interest rate that the
company committed to pay when the bond process was first begun. This difference can lead to bonds being
issued (sold) at a discount or premium.
Finally, while loans can normally be paid off before they are due, in most cases bonds must be held by an
owner until they mature. Because of this last characteristic, a bond,such as a thirty-year bond, might have
several owners over its lifetime, while most long-term notes payable will only have one owner.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Bond Fraud
The U.S. Department of the Treasury (DOT) defines historical bonds as “those bonds that were once valid
obligations of American entities but are now worthless as securities and are quickly becoming a favorite
tool of scam artists.”

[1]

The DOT also warns against scams selling non-existent “limited edition” U.S.

Treasury securities. The scam involves approaching broker-dealers and banks to act as fiduciaries for
transactions. Further, the DOT notes: “The proposal to sell these fictitious securities makes
misrepresentations about the way marketable securities are bought and sold, and it also misrepresents
the role that we play in the original sale and issuance of our securities.”

[2]

Many fraudulent attempts are

made to sell such bonds.
According to Business Insider, in the commonest scam, a fake bearer bond is offered for sale for far less
than its stated cover price. The difference in the cost and the cover price entices the victim to buy the
bond. Again, from Business Insider: “Another variation is a flavor of the ‘Nigerian prince’ scheme; the
fraudster will ask for the victim’s help in depositing a recently obtained ‘fortune’ in bonds, promising the
victim a cut in return.”

[3]

A diligent accountant is both educated about the investments of their company or organization and is
skeptical about any investment that looks too good to be true.

1 U.S. Department of the Treasury. “Historical Bond Fraud.” September 21, 2012. https://www.treasury.gov/about/organizational-structure/
ig/Pages/Scams/Historical-Bond-Fraud.aspx
2 U.S. Department of the Treasury. “Examples of Known Phony Securities.” April 5, 2013. https://www.treasury.gov/about/organizationalstructure/ig/Pages/Scams/Examples-of-Known-Phony-Securities.aspx
3 Lawrence Delavigne. “Fake Bearer Bonds Were Just the Beginning of Huge Wave of Bond-Fraud.” Business Insider. October 12, 2009.
https://www.businessinsider.com/bond-fraud-is-on-the-rise-2009-10

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

813

YOUR TURN
Current versus Long-Term Liabilities
Below is a portion of the 2017 Balance Sheet of Emerson, Inc. (shown in millions of dollars).

[4]

There are

several observations we can make from this information.

Notice the company lists separately the Current Liabilities (listed as “Short-term borrowings and current
maturities of long-term debt”) and Long-term Liabilities (listed as “Long-term debt”). Also, under the
“Current liabilities” heading, notice the “Short-term borrowings and current maturities of long-term
debt” decreased significantly from 2016 to 2017. In 2016, Emerson held $2.584 billion in short-term
borrowings and current maturities of long-term debt. This amount decreased by $1.722 billion in 2017,
which is a 67% decrease. During the same timeframe, long-term debt decreased $257 million, going from
$4.051 billion to $3.794 billion, which is a 6.3% decrease.
Thinking about the primary purpose of accounting, why do you think accountants separate liabilities into
current liabilities and long-term liabilities?
Solution
The primary purpose of accounting is to provide stakeholders with financial information that is useful for
decision making. It is important for stakeholders to understand how much cash will be required to satisfy
liabilities within the next year (liquidity) as well as how much will be required to satisfy long-term
liabilities (solvency). Stakeholders, especially lenders and owners, are concerned with both liquidity and
solvency of the business.

Fundamentals of Bonds
Now let us look at bonds in more depth. A bond is a type of financial instrument that a company issues directly
to investors, bypassing banks or other lending institutions, with a promise to pay the investor a specified rate
of interest over a specified period of time. When a company borrows money by selling bonds, it is said the
company is “issuing” bonds. This means the company exchanges cash for a promise to repay the cash, along
with interest, over a set period of time. As you’ve learned, bonds are formal legal documents that contain
specific information related to the bond. In short, it is a legal contract—called a bond certificate (as shown in
Figure 13.3) or an indenture—between the issuer (the business borrowing the money) and the lender (the
investor lending the money). Bonds are typically issued in relatively small denominations, such as $1,000 so
they can be placed in the market and are accessible to a greater market of investors compared to notes. The

4 Emerson. 2017 Annual Report. Emerson Electric Company. 2017. https://www.emerson.com/documents/corporate/
2017emersonannualreport-en-2883292.pdf

814

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

bond indenture is a contract that lists the features of the bond, such as the amount of money that will be
repaid in the future, called the principal (also called face value or maturity value); the maturity date, the day
the bond holder will receive the principal amount; and the stated interest rate, which is the rate of interest
the issuer agrees to pay the bondholder throughout the term of the bond.

Figure 13.3

Bond Certificate. If you bought this $1,000 bond on July 1, 2018 and received this bond

certificate, it had three important pieces of information: the maturity date (June 30, 2023, 5 years from the
issue date when the company will pay back the $1,000; the principal amount ($1,000) which is the amount you
will receive in 2023; and the stated annual interest rate (5%) which they will use to determine how much cash
to send you each year (0.05 × $1,000 = $50 interest a year for 5 years). (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
For a typical bond, the issuer commits to paying a stated interest rate either once a year (annually) or twice a
year (semiannually). It is important to understand that the stated rate will not go up or down over the life of
the bond. This means the borrower will pay the same semiannual or annual interest payment on the same
dates for the life of the bond. In other words, when an investor buys a typical bond, the investor will receive, in
the future, two major cash flows: periodic interest payments paid either annually or semiannually based on
the stated rate of the bond, and the maturity value, which is the total amount paid to the owner of the bond on
the maturity date.

LINK TO LEARNING
The website for the nonprofit Kiva (https://openstax.org/l/50Kiva) allows you to lend money to people
around the world. The borrower makes monthly payments to pay the loan back. The companies Prosper
(https://openstax.org/l/50Prosper) and LendingClub (https://openstax.org/l/50LendingClub) let you
borrow or lend money to people in the U.S. who then make monthly payments, with interest, to pay it

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

815

back.

The process of preparing a bond issuance for sale and then selling on the primary market is lengthy, complex,
and is usually performed by underwriters—finance professionals who specialize in issuing bonds and other
financial instruments. Here, we will only examine transactions concerning issuance, interest payments, and the
sale of existing bonds.
There are two other important characteristics of bonds to discuss. First, for most companies, the total value of
bonds issued can often range from hundreds of thousands to several million dollars. The primary reason for
this is that bonds are typically used to help finance significant long-term projects or activities, such as the
purchase of equipment, land, buildings, or another company.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Apple Inc. Issues Bonds
On May 11, 2017, Apple Inc. issued bonds to get cash. Apple Inc. submitted a form to the Securities and
Exchange Commission (www.sec.gov) to announce their intentions.

On May 3 of the same year, Apple Inc. had issued their 10-Q (quarterly report) that showed the following
assets.

Apple Inc. reported it had $15 billion dollars in cash and a total of $101 billion in Current Assets. Why did
it need to issue bonds to raise $7 billion more?
Analysts suggested that Apple would use the cash to pay shareholder dividends. Even though Apple
reported billions of dollars in cash, most of the cash was in foreign countries because that was where the
products had been sold. Tax laws vary by country, but if Apple transferred the cash to a US bank account,

816

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

they would have to pay US income tax on it, at a tax rate as high as 39%. So, Apple was much better off
borrowing and paying 3.2% interest, which is tax deductible, than bringing the cash to the US and paying
a 39% income tax.
However, it’s important to remember that in the United States, Congress can change tax laws at any
time, so what was then current tax law when this transaction occurred could change in the future.

The second characteristic of bonds is that bonds are often sold to several investors instead of to one individual
investor.
When establishing the stated rate of interest the business will pay on a bond, bond underwriters consider
many factors, including the interest rates on government treasury bonds (which are assumed to be risk-free),
rates on comparable bond offerings, and firm-specific factors related to the business’s risk (including its ability
to repay the bond). The more likely the possibility that a company will default on the bond, meaning they
either miss an interest payment or do not return the maturity amount to the bond’s owner when it matures,
the higher the interest rate is on the bond. It is important to understand that the stated rate will not change
over the life of any one bond once it is issued. However, the stated rate on future new bonds may change as
economic circumstances and the company’s financial position changes.
Bonds themselves can have different characteristics. For example, a debenture is an unsecured bond issued
based on the good name and reputation of the company. These companies are not pledging other assets to
cover the amount in case they fail to pay the debt, or default. The opposite of a debenture is a secured bond,
meaning the company is pledging a specific asset as collateral for the bond. With a secured bond, if the
company goes under and cannot pay back the bond, the pledged asset would be sold, and the proceeds would
be distributed to the bondholders.
There are term bonds, or single-payment bonds, meaning the entire bond will be repaid all at once, rather
than in a series of payments. And there are serial bonds, or bonds that will mature over a period of time and
will be repaid in a series of payments.
A callable bond (also known as a redeemable bond) is one that can be repurchased or “called” by the issuer
of the bond. If a company sells callable bonds with an 8% interest rate and the interest rate the bank is
offering subsequently drops to 5%, the company can borrow at that new rate of 5%, call the 8% bonds, and pay
them off (even if the purchaser does not want to sell them back). In essence, the institution would be lowering
its rate of interest to borrow money from 8% to 5% by calling the bond.
Putable bonds give the bondholder the right to decide whether to sell it back early or keep it until it matures.
It is essentially the opposite of a callable bond.
A convertible bond can be converted to common stock in a one-way, one-time conversion. Under what
conditions would it make sense to convert? Suppose the face-value interest rate of the bond is 8%. If the
company is doing well this year, such that there is an expectation that shareholders will receive a significant
dividend and the stock price will rise, the stock might appear to be more valuable than the return on the bond.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

817

THINK IT THROUGH
Callable versus Putable Bonds
Which type of bond is better for the corporation issuing the bond: callable or putable?

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Junk Bonds
Junk bonds, which are also called speculative or high-yield bonds, are a specific type of bond that can be
attractive to certain investors. On one hand, junk bonds are attractive because the bonds pay a rate of
interest that is significantly higher than the average market rate. On the other hand, the bonds are
riskier because the issuing company is deemed to have a higher risk of defaulting on the bonds. If the
economy or the company’s financial condition deteriorates, the company will be unable to repay the
money borrowed. In short, junk bonds are deemed to be high risk, high reward investments.
The development of the junk bond market, which occurred during the 1970s and 1980s, is attributed to
Michael Milken, the so-called “junk bond king.” Milken amassed a large fortune by using junk bonds as a
means of financing corporate mergers and acquisitions. It is estimated that during the 1980s, Milken
earned between $200 million and $550 million per year.

[5]

In 1990, however, Milken’s winning streak

came to an end when, according to the New York Times, he was indicted on “98 counts of racketeering,
securities fraud, mail fraud and other crimes.”

[6]

He later pleaded guilty to six charges, resulting in a

10-year prison sentence, of which he served two, and was as also forced to pay over $600 million in fines
and settlements.

[7]

Today, Milken remains active in philanthropic activities and, as a cancer survivor, remains committed to
medical research.

Pricing Bonds
Imagine a concert-goer who has an extra ticket for a good seat at a popular concert that is sold out. The
concert-goer purchased the ticket from the box office at its face value of $100. Because the show is sold out,
the ticket could be resold at a premium. But what happens if the concert-goer paid $100 for the ticket and the
show is not popular and does not sell out? To convince someone to purchase the ticket from her instead of the
box office, the concert-goer will need to sell the ticket at a discount. Bonds behave in the same way as this
concert ticket.
Bond quotes can be found in the financial sections of newspapers or on the Internet on many financial
websites. Bonds are quoted as a percentage of the bond’s maturity value. The percentage is determined by

5 James Chen. “Micheal Milken.” January 22, 2018. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/michaelmilken.asp
6 Kurt Eichenwald. “Milken Set to Pay a $600 Million Fine in Wall St. Fraud.” April 21, 1990. https://www.nytimes.com/1990/04/21/business/
milken-set-to-pay-a-600-million-fine-in-wall-st-fraud.html?pagewanted=all
7 Michael Buchanan. “November 21, 1990, Michael Milken Sentenced to 10 Years for Security Law Violations.” November 20, 2011.
http://reasonabledoubt.org/criminallawblog/entry/november-21-1990-michael-milken-sentenced-to-10-years-for-security-law-violations-todayin-crime-history-1

818

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

dividing the current market (selling) price by the maturity value, and then multiplying the value by 100 to
convert the decimal into a percentage. In the case of a $30,000 bond discounted to $27,591.94 because of an
increase in the market rate of interest, the bond quote would be $27,591.24/$30,000 × 100, or 91.9708. Using
another example, a quote of 88.50 would mean that the bonds in question are selling for 88.50% of the
maturity value. If an investor were considering buying a bond with a $10,000 maturity value, the investor
would pay 88.50% of the maturity value of $10,000, or $8,850.00. If the investor was considering bonds with a
maturity value of $100,000, the price would be $88,500. If the quote were over 100, this would indicate that the
market interest rate has decreased from its initial rate. For example, a quote of 123.45 indicates that the
investor would pay $123,450 for a $100,000 bond.
Figure 13.4 shows a bond issued on July 1, 2018. It is a promise to pay the holder of the bond $1,000 on June
30, 2023, and 5% of $1,000 every year. We will use this bond to explore how a company addresses interest rate
changes when issuing bonds.

Figure 13.4

Bond Certificate. A bond certificate shows the terms of the bond. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
On this bond certificate, we see the following:
• The $1,000 principal or maturity value.
• The interest rate printed on the face of the bond is the stated interest rate, the contract rate, the face rate,
or the coupon rate. This rate is the interest rate used to calculate the interest payment on bonds.

Issuing Bonds When the Contract and Market Rates Are the Same
If the stated rate and the market rate are both 5%, the bond will be issued at par value, which is the value
assigned to stock in the company’s charter, typically set at a very small arbitrary amount, which serves as legal
capital; in our example, the part value is $1,000. The purchaser will give the company $1,000 today and will
receive $50 at the end of every year for 5 years. In 5 years, the purchaser will receive the maturity value of the
$1,000. The bond’s quoted price is 100.00. That is, the bond will sell at 100% of the $1,000 face value, which
means the seller of the bond will receive (and the investor will pay) $1,000.00. You will learn the calculations

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

819

used to determine a bond’s quoted price later; here, we will provide the quoted price for any calculations.

LINK TO LEARNING
The Securities and Exchange Commission website Investor.gov provides an explanation of corporate
bonds (https://openstax.org/l/50SECBonds) to learn more.

Issuing Bonds at a Premium
The stated interest rate is not the only rate affecting bonds. There is also the market interest rate, also called
the effective interest rate or bond yield. The amount of money that borrowers receive on the date the bonds
are issued is influenced by the terms stated on the bond indenture and on the market interest rate, which is
the rate of interest that investors can earn on similar investments. The market interest rate is influenced by
many factors external to the business, such as the overall strength of the economy, the value of the U.S. dollar,
and geopolitical factors.
This market interest rate is the rate determined by supply and demand, the current overall economic
conditions, and the credit worthiness of the borrower, among other factors. Suppose that, while a company
has been busy during the long process of getting its bonds approved and issued (it might take several
months), the interest rate changed because circumstances in the market changed. At this point, the company
cannot change the rate used to market the bond issue. Instead, the company might have to sell the bonds at a
price that will be the equivalent of having a different stated rate (one that is equivalent to a market rate based
on the company’s financial characteristics at the time of the issuance (sale) of the bonds).
If the company offers 5% (the bond rate used to market the bond issue) and the market rate prior to issuance
drops to 4%, the bonds will be in high demand. The company is scheduled to pay a higher interest rate than
everyone else, so it can issue them for more than face value, or at a premium. In this example, where the
stated interest rate is higher than the market interest rate, let’s say the bond’s quoted price is 104.46. That is,
the bond will sell at 104.46% of the $1,000 face value, which means the seller of the bond will receive and the
investor will pay $1,044.60.

Issuing Bonds at a Discount
Now let’s consider a situation when the company’s bonds prior to issuance are scheduled to pay 5% and the
market rate jumps to 7% at issuance. No one will want to buy the bonds at 5% when they can earn more
interest elsewhere. The company will have to sell the $1,000 bond for less than $1,000, or at a discount. In this
example, where the stated interest rate is lower than the market interest rate, the bond’s quoted price is 91.80.
That is, the bond will sell at 91.80% of the $1,000 face value, which means the seller of the bond will receive
(and the investor will pay) $918.00.

Sale of Bonds before Maturity
Let’s look at bonds from the perspective of the issuer and the investor. As we previously discussed, bonds are
often classified as long-term liabilities because the money is borrowed for long periods of time, up to 30 years
in some cases. This provides the business with the money necessary to fund long-term projects and
investments in the business. Due to unanticipated circumstances, the investors, on the other hand, may not

820

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

want to wait up to 30 years to receive the maturity value of the bond. While the investor will receive periodic
interest payments while the bond is held, investors may want to receive the current market value prior to the
maturity date. Therefore, from the investor’s perspective, one of the advantages of investing in bonds is that
they are typically easy to sell in the secondary market should the investor need the money before the maturity
date, which may be many years in the future. The secondary market is an organized market where previously
issued stocks and bonds can be traded after they are issued.
If a bond sells on the secondary market after it has been issued, the terms of the bond (a particular interest
rate, at a determined timeframe, and a given maturity value) do not change. If an investor buys a bond after it
is issued or sells it before it matures, there is the possibility that the investor will receive more or less for the
bond than the amount the bond was originally sold for. This change in value may occur if the market interest
rate differs from the stated interest rate.

C O N T I N U I N G A P P L I C AT I O N AT W O R K
Debt Considerations for Grocery Stores
Every company faces internal decisions when it comes to borrowing funds for improvements and/or
expansions. Consider the improvements your local grocery stores have made over the past couple of
years. Just like any large retail business, if grocery stores don’t invest in each property by adding services,
upgrading the storefront, or even making more energy efficient changes, the location can fall out of
popularity.
Such investments require large amounts of capital infusion. The primary available investment funds for
privately-owned grocery chains are bank loans or owners’ capital. This limitation often restricts the
expansions or upgrades such a company can do at any one time. Publicly-traded grocery chains can also
borrow funds from a bank, but other options, like issuing bonds or more stock can also help fund
development. Thus publicly-traded grocery chains have more options to fund improvements and can
therefore expand their share of the market more easily, unlike their private smaller counterparts who
must decide what improvement is the most critical.

Fundamentals of Interest Calculation
Since interest is paid on long-term liabilities, we now need to examine the process of calculating interest.
Interest can be calculated in several ways, some more common than others. For our purposes, we will explore
interest calculations using the simple method and the compounded method. Regardless of the method
involved, there are three components that we need when calculating interest:
1. Amount of money borrowed (called the principal).
2. Interest rate for the time frame of the loan. Note that interest rates are usually stated in annual terms
(e.g., 8% per year). If the timeframe is excluded, an annual rate should be assumed. Pay particular
attention to how often the interest is to be paid because this will affect the rate used in the calculation:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

821

For example, if the rate on a bond is 6% per year but the interest is paid semi-annually, the rate used in
the interest calculation should be 3% because the interest applies to a 6-month timeframe (6% ÷ 2).
Similarly, if the rate on a bond is 8% per year but the interest is paid quarterly, the rate used in the
interest calculation should be 2% (8% ÷ 4).
3. Time period for which we are calculating the interest.
Let’s explore simple interest first. We use the following formula to calculate interest in dollars:

Principal is the amount of money invested or borrowed, interest rate is the interest rate paid or earned, and
time is the length of time the principal is borrowed or invested. Consider a bank deposit of $100 that remains
in the account for 3 years, earning 6% per year with the bank paying simple interest. In this calculation, the
interest rate is 6% a year, paid once at the end of the year. Using the interest rate formula from above, the
interest rate remains 6% (6% ÷ 1). Using 6% interest per year earned on a $100 principal provides the following
results in the first three years (Figure 13.5):
• Year 1: The $100 in the bank earns 6% interest, and at the end of the year, the bank pays $6.00 in interest,
making the amount in the bank account $106 ($100 principal + $6 interest).
• Year 2: Assuming we do not withdraw the interest, the $106 in the bank earns 6% interest on the principal
($100), and at the end of the year, the bank pays $6 in interest, making the total amount $112.
• Year 3: Again, assuming we do not withdraw the interest, $112 in the bank earns 6% interest on the
principal ($100), and at the end of the year, the bank pays $6 in interest, making the total amount $118.

Figure 13.5

Simple Interest. Simple interest earns money only on the principal. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
With simple interest, the amount paid is always based on the principal, not on any interest earned.
Another method commonly used for calculating interest involves compound interest. Compound interest
means that the interest earned also earns interest. Figure 13.6 shows the same deposit with compounded
interest.

Figure 13.6

Compund Interest. Compound interest earns money on the principal plus interest earned in a

previous period. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

822

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

In this case, investing $100 today in a bank that pays 6% per year for 3 years with compound interest will
produce $119.10 at the end of the three years, instead of $118.00, which was earned with simple interest.
At this point, we need to provide an assumption we make in this chapter. Since financial institutions typically
cannot deal in fractions of a cent, in calculations such as the above, we will round the final answer to the
nearest cent, if necessary. For example, the final cash total at the end of the third year in the above example
would be $119.1016. However, we rounded the answer to the nearest cent for convenience. In the case of a car
or home loan, the rounding can lead to a higher or lower adjustment in your final payment. For example, you
might finance a car loan by borrowing $20,000 for 48 months with monthly payments of $469.70 for the first 47
months and $469.74 for the final payment.

LINK TO LEARNING
Go to the Securities and Exchange Commission website for an explanation of US Savings Bonds
(https://openstax.org/l/50SECSaveBond) to learn more.

13.2

Compute Amortization of Long-Term Liabilities Using the Effective-

Interest Method
In our discussion of long-term debt amortization, we will examine both notes payable and bonds. While they
have some structural differences, they are similar in the creation of their amortization documentation.

Pricing of Long-Term Notes Payable
When a consumer borrows money, she can expect to not only repay the amount borrowed, but also to pay
interest on the amount borrowed. When she makes periodic loan payments that pay back the principal and
interest over time with payments of equal amounts, these are considered fully amortized notes. In these
timed payments, part of what she pays is interest. The amount borrowed that is still due is often called the
principal. After she has made her final payment, she no longer owes anything, and the loan is fully repaid, or
amortized. Amortization is the process of separating the principal and interest in the loan payments over the
life of a loan. A fully amortized loan is fully paid by the end of the maturity period.
In the following example, assume that the borrower acquired a five-year, $10,000 loan from a bank. She will
repay the loan with five equal payments at the end of the year for the next five years. The bank’s required
interest rate is an annual rate of 12%.
Interest rates are typically quoted in annual terms. Since her interest rate is 12% a year, the borrower must pay
12% interest each year on the principal that she owes. As stated above, these are equal annual payments, and
each payment is first applied to any applicable interest expenses, with the remaining funds reducing the
principal balance of the loan.
After each payment in a fully amortizing loan, the principal is reduced, which means that since the five
payment amounts are equal, the portion allocated to interest is reduced each year, and the amount allocated
to principal reduction increases an equal amount.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

823

We can use an amortization table, or schedule, prepared using Microsoft Excel or other financial software, to
show the loan balance for the duration of the loan. An amortization table calculates the allocation of interest
and principal for each payment and is used by accountants to make journal entries. These journal entrieswill
be discussed later in this chapter.
The first step in preparing an amortization table is to determine the annual loan payment. The $10,000 loan
amount is the value today and, in financial terms, is called the present value (PV). Since repayment will be in a
series of five equal payments, it is an annuity. Look up the PV from an annuity table for 5 periods and 12%
interest. The factor is 3.605. Dividing the principal, $10,000, by the factor 3.605 gives us $2,773.93, which is the
amount of each yearly payment. For the rest of the chapter, we will provide the necessary data, such as bond
prices and payment amounts; you will not need to use the present value tables.
When the first payment is made, part of it is interest and part is principal. To determine the amount of the
payment that is interest, multiply the principal by the interest rate ($10,000 × 0.12), which gives us $1,200. This
is the amount of interest charged that year. The payment itself ($2,773.93) is larger than the interest owed for
that period of time, so the remainder of the payment is applied against the principal.
Figure 13.7 shows an amortization table for this $10,000 loan, over five years at 12% annual interest. Assume
that the final payment will be $2,774.99 in order to eliminate the potential rounding error of $1.06.

Figure 13.7

Amortization Table. An amortization table shows how payments are applied to interest in

principal for the life of the loan. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)

YOUR TURN
Creating Your Own Amortization Table
You want to borrow $100,000 for five years when the interest rate is 5%. You will make yearly payments
of $23,097.48 for 5 years. Fill in the blanks in the amortization table below. Assume that the loan was

824

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

created on January 1, 2018 and totally repaid by December 31, 2022, after five equal, annual payments.

Solution
Multiply the $100,000 by the 5% interest rate and $5,000 is the amount of interest you owe for year 1.
Subtract the interest from the payment of $23,097.48 to find $18,097.48 is applied toward the principal
($100,000), leaving $81,902.52 as the ending balance. In year 2, $81,902.52 is charged 5% interest
($4,095.13), but the rest of the 23,097.48 payment goes toward the loan balance. Follow the same process
for years 3 through 5.

Bonds Payable
As you’ve learned, each time a company issues an interest payment to bondholders, amortization of the
discount or premium, if one exists, impacts the amount of interest expense that is recorded. Amortization of
the discounts increases the amount of interest expense and premiums reduce the amount of interest expense.
There are two methods used to amortize bond discounts or premiums: the effective-interest method and the
straight-line method.
Our calculations have used what is known as the effective-interest method, a method that calculates interest
expense based on the carrying value of the bond and the market interest rate. Generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP) require the use of the effective-interest method unless there is no significant difference
between the effective-interest method and the straight-line method, a method that allocates the same amount
of the bond discount or premium for each interest payment. The effective interest amortization method is
more accurate than the straight-line method. International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) require the
use of the effective-interest method, with no exceptions.
The straight-line method doesn’t base its calculation of amortization for a period base on a changing
carrying value like the effective-interest method does; instead, it allocates the same amount of premium or

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

825

discount amortation for each of the bond’s payment periods.
For example, assume that $500,000 in bonds were issued at a price of $540,000 on January 1, 2019, with the
first annual interest payment to be made on December 31, 2019. Assume that the stated interest rate is 10%
and the bond has a four-year life. If the straight-line method is used to amortize the $40,000 premium, you
would divide the premium of $40,000 by the number of payments, in this case four, giving a $10,000 per year
amortization of the premium. Figure 13.8 shows the effects of the premium amortization after all of the 2019
transactions are considered. The net effect of creating the $40,000 premium and writing off $10,000 of it gives
the company an interest expense of $40,000 instead of $50,000, since the $50,000 expense is reduced by the
$10,000 premium write down at the end of the year.

Figure 13.8

Premium Amortization Using the Straight-Line Method. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Issued When Market Rate Equals Contract Rate
Assume a company issues a $100,000 bond with a 5% stated rate when the market rate is also 5%. The bond
was issued at par, meaning it sold for $100,000. There was no premium or discount to amortize, so there is no
application of the effective-interest method in this example.

Issued at a Premium
The same company also issued a 5-year, $100,000 bond with a stated rate of 5% when the market rate was 4%.
This bond was issued at a premium, for $104,460. The amount of the premium is $4,460, which will be
amortized over the life of the bond using the effective-interest method. This method of amortizing the interest
expense associated with a bond is similar to the amortization of the note payable described earlier, in which
the principal was separated from the interest payments using the interest rate times the principal.
Begin by assuming the company issued all the bonds on January 1 of year 1 and the first interest payment will
be made on December 31 of year 1. The amortization table begins on January 1, year 1, with the carrying value
of the bond: the face value of the bond plus the bond premium.
On December 31, year 1, the company will have to pay the bondholders $5,000 (0.05 × $100,000). The cash
interest payment is the amount of interest the company must pay the bondholder. The company promised 5%
when the market rate was 4% so it received more money. But the company is only paying interest on
$100,000—not on the full amount received. The difference in the sale price was a result of the difference in the
interest rates so both rates are used to compute the true interest expense.

826

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

The interest on the carrying value is the market rate of interest times the carrying value: 0.04 × $104,460 =
$4,178. If the company had issued the bonds with a stated rate of 4%, and received $104,460, it would be
paying $4,178 in interest. The difference between the cash interest payment and the interest on the carrying
value is the amount to be amortized the first year. The complete amortization table for the bond is shown in
Figure 13.9. The table is necessary to provide the calculations needed for the adjusting journal entries.

Figure 13.9

Bond Amortization Table. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA

4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

827

Issued at a Discount
The company also issued $100,000 of 5% bonds when the market rate was 7%. It received $91,800 cash and
recorded a Discount on Bonds Payable of $8,200. This amount will need to be amortized over the 5-year life of
the bonds. Using the same format for an amortization table, but having received $91,800, interest payments
are being made on $100,000.

The cash interest payment is still the stated rate times the principal. The interest on carrying value is still the
market rate times the carrying value. The difference in the two interest amounts is used to amortize the
discount, but now the amortization of discount amount is added to the carrying value.

Figure 13.10 illustrates the relationship between rates whenever a premium or discount is created at bond
issuance.

Figure 13.10

Stated Rate and Market Rate. When the stated rate is higher than the market rate, the bond is

issued at a premium. When the stated rate is lower than the market rate, the bond is issued at a discount.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

828

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Bond Ratings

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

829

Investors intending to purchase corporate bonds may find it overwhelming to decide which company
would be the best to invest in. Investors are concerned with two primary factors: the return on the
investment (meaning, the periodic interest payments) and the return of the investment (meaning,
payment of the face value on the maturity date). While there are risks with any investment, attempting to
maximize the return on the investment and maximizing the likelihood receiving the return of the
investment would take a significant amount of time for the investor. To become informed and make a
wise investment, the investor would have to spend many hours analyzing the financial statements of
potential companies to invest in.
One resource investors find useful when screening investment opportunities is through the use of rating
agencies. Rating agencies specialize in analyzing financial and other company information in order to
assess and rate a company’s riskiness as an investment. A particularly useful website is Investopedia
(https://openstax.org/l/50Investopedia) which highlights the rating system for three large rating
agencies—Moody’s, Standard & Poor’s, and Fitch Ratings. The rating systems, shown below, are
somewhat similar to academic grading scales, with rankings ranging from A (highest quality) to D (lowest
quality):
Rating Agencies
Credit Risk

[8]

Moody’s

Standard & Poor’s

Fitch Ratings

—

—

—

Aaa

AAA

AAA

Aa1, Aa2, Aa3

AA+, AA, AA–

AA+, AA, A–

A1, A2, A3

A+, A, A–

A+, A, A–

Baa1, Baa2, Baa3

BBB+, BBB, BBB–

BBB+, BBB, BBB–

Ba1

BB+

BB+

Speculative Medium

Ba2, Ba3

BB, BB–

BB, BB–

Speculative Lower Grade

B1, B2, B3

B+, B, B–

B+, B, B–

Caa1

CCC+

CCC

Speculative Poor Standing

Caa2, Caa3

CCC, CCC–

—

No Payments / Bankruptcy

Ca / C

—

—

—

D

DDD, DD, D

Investment Grade
Highest Quality
High Quality
Upper Medium
Medium
Not Investment Grade

Speculative Risky

In Default
Table 13.1

8 Michael Schmidt. “When to Trust Bond Rating Agencies.” Investopedia. September 29, 2018.
https://www.investopedia.com/articles/bonds/09/bond-rating-agencies.asp

830

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

13.3

Prepare Journal Entries to Reflect the Life Cycle of Bonds

Recall from the discussion in Explain the Pricing of Long-Term Liabilities that one way businesses can generate
long-term financing is by borrowing from lenders.
In this section, we will explore the journal entries related to bonds. Earlier, we found that cash flows related to
a bond include the following:
1. The receipt of cash when the bond is issued
2. Payment of interest each period
3. Repayment of the bond at maturity
A journal entry must be made for each of these transactions. As we go through the journal entries, it is
important to understand that we are analyzing the accounting transactions from the perspective of the issuer
of the bond. These are considered long-term liabilities. The investor would make the opposite journal entries.
For example, on the issue date of a bond, the borrower receives cash while the lender pays cash.
A final point to consider relates to accounting for the interest costs on the bond. Recall that the bond
indenture specifies how much interest the borrower will pay with each periodic payment based on the stated
rate of interest. The periodic interest payments to the buyer (investor) will be the same over the course of the
bond. It may help to think of personal loan examples. For example, if you or your family have ever borrowed
money from a bank for a car or home, the payments are typically the same each month. The interest payments
will be the same because of the rate stipulated in the bond indenture, regardless of what the market rate does.
The amount of interest cost that we will recognize in the journal entries, however, will change over the course
of the bond term, assuming that we are using the effective interest.

IFRS CONNECTION
Defining Long-Term Liabilities
Under both IFRS and US GAAP, the general definition of a long-term liability is similar. However, there are
many types of long-term liabilities, and various types have specific measurement and reporting criteria
that may differ between the two sets of accounting standards. With two exceptions, bonds payable are
primarily the same under the two sets of standards.
The first difference pertains to the method of interest amortization. Beyond FASB’s preferred method of
interest amortization discussed here, there is another method, the straight-line method. This method is
permitted under US GAAP if the results produced by its use would not be materially different than if the
effective-interest method were used. IFRS does not permit straight-line amortization and only allows the
effective-interest method.
The second difference pertains to how the bonds are reported on the books. Under US GAAP, bonds are
recorded at face value and the premium or discount is recorded in a separate account. IFRS does not use
“premium” or “discount” accounts. Instead, under IFRS, the carrying value of bonds issued at either a
premium or discount is shown on the balance sheet at its net. For example, $100,000 bonds issued at a
discount of $4,000 would be recorded under US GAAP as

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

831

Under IFRS, these bonds would be reported as

Obviously, the above example implies that, in the subsequent entries to recognize interest expense,
under IFRS, the Bonds Payable account is amortized directly for the increase or reduction in bond
principal. Suppose in this example that the cash interest was $200 and the interest expense for the first
interest period was $250. The entry to record the transaction under the two different standards would be
as follows:
Under US GAAP:

Under IFRS:

Note that under either method, the interest expense and the carrying value of the bonds stays the same.

Issuance of Bonds
Since the process of underwriting a bond issuance is lengthy and extensive, there can be several months
between the determination of the specific characteristics of a bond issue and the actual issuance of the bond.
Before the bonds can be issued, the underwriters perform many time-consuming tasks, including setting the
bond interest rate. The bond interest rate is influenced by specific factors relating to the company, such as
existing debt balances and the ability of the company to repay the funds, as well as the market rate, which is
influenced by many external economic factors.
Because of the time lag caused by underwriting, it is not unusual for the market rate of the bond to be

832

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

different from the stated interest rate. The difference in the stated rate and the market rate determine the
accounting treatment of the transactions involving bonds. When the bond is issued at par, the accounting
treatment is simplest. It becomes more complicated when the stated rate and the market rate differ.

Issued When Market Rate Equals Contract Rate
First, we will explore the case when the stated interest rate is equal to the market interest rate when the bonds
are issued.
Returning to our example of a $1,000, 5-year bond with a stated interest rate of 5%, at issuance, the market
rate was 5% and the sales price was quoted at 100, which means the seller of the bond will receive (and the
investor will pay) 100% of the $1,000 face value of the bond. The journal entry to record the sale of 100 of these
bonds is:

Since the book value is equal to the amount that will be owed in the future, no other account is included in the
journal entry.

Issued at a Premium
If, during the timeframe of establishing the bond stated rate and issuing the bonds, the market rate drops
below the stated interest, the bonds would become more valuable. In other words, the investors will earn a
higher rate on these bonds than if the investors purchased similar bonds elsewhere in the market. Naturally,
investors would want to purchase these bonds and earn a higher interest rate. The increased demand drives
up the bond price to a point where investors earn the same interest as similar bonds. Earlier, we found that
the sale price of a $1,000, 5-year bond with a stated rate of 5% and a market rate of 4% is 104.46. That is, the
bond will sell at 104.46% of the $1,000 face value, which means the seller of the bond will receive (and the
investor will pay) $1,044.60.
Selling 100 of these bonds, would yield $104,460.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

833

The financial statement presentation looks like this:

On the date that the bonds were issued, the company received cash of $104,460.00 but agreed to pay
$100,000.00 in the future for 100 bonds with a $1,000 face value. The difference in the amount received and the
amount owed is called the premium. Since they promised to pay 5% while similar bonds earn 4%, the company
received more cash up front. In other words, they sold the bond at a premium. They did this because the cost
of the premium plus the 5% interest on the face value is mathematically the same as receiving the face value
but paying 4% interest. The interest rate was effectively the same.
The premium on bonds payable account is a contra liability account. It is contra because it increases the
amount of the Bonds Payable liability account. It is “married” to the Bonds Payable account on the balance
sheet. If one of the accounts appears, both must appear. The Premium will disappear over time as it is
amortized, but it will decrease the interest expense, which we will see in subsequent journal entries.
Taken together, the Bond Payable liability of $100,000 and the Premium on Bond Payable contra liability of
$4,460 show the bond’s carrying value or book value—the value that assets or liabilities are recorded at in the
company’s financial statements.
The effect on the accounting equation looks like this:

It looks like the issuer will have to pay back $104,460, but this is not quite true. If the bonds were to be paid off
today, the full $104,460 would have to be paid back. But as time passes, the Premium account is amortized
until it is zero. The bondholders have bonds that say the issuer will pay them $100,000, so that is all that is
owed at maturity. The premium will disappear over time and will reduce the amount of interest incurred.

Issued at a Discount
Bonds issued at a discount are the exact opposite in concept as bonds issued at a premium. If, during the
timeframe of establishing the bond stated rate and issuing the bonds, the market rate rises above the stated

834

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

interest on the bonds, the bonds become less valuable because investors can earn a higher rate of interest on
other similar bonds. In other words, the investors will earn a lower rate on these bonds than if the investors
purchased similar bonds elsewhere in the market. Naturally, investors would not want to purchase these
bonds and earn a lower interest rate than could be earned elsewhere. The decreased demand drives down the
bond price to a point where investors earn the same interest for similar bonds. Earlier, we found the sale price
of a $1,000, 5-year bond with a stated interest rate of 5% and a market rate of 7% is 91.80. That is, the bond will
sell at 91.80% of the $1,000 face value, which means the seller of the bond will receive (and the investor will
pay) $918.00. On selling 100 of the $1,000 bonds today, the journal entry would be:

Today, the company receives cash of $91,800.00, and it agrees to pay $100,000.00 in the future for 100 bonds
with a $1,000 face value. The difference in the amount received and the amount owed is called the discount.
Since they promised to pay 5% while similar bonds earn 7%, the company, accepted less cash up front. In other
words, they sold the bond at a discount. They did this because giving a discount but still paying only 5%
interest on the face value is mathematically the same as receiving the face value but paying 7% interest. The
interest rate was effectively the same.
Like the Premium on Bonds Payable account, the discount on bonds payable account is a contra liability
account and is “married” to the Bonds Payable account on the balance sheet. The Discount will disappear over
time as it is amortized, but it will increase the interest expense, which we will see in subsequent journal
entries.
The effect on the accounting equation looks like this:

First and Second Semiannual Interest Payment
When a company issues bonds, they make a promise to pay interest annually or sometimes more often. If the
interest is paid annually, the journal entry is made on the last day of the bond’s year. If interest was promised

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

835

semiannually, entries are made twice a year.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Municipal Bonds
Municipal bonds are a specific type of bonds that are issued by governmental entities such as towns and
school districts. These bonds are issued in order to finance specific projects (such as water treatment
plants and school building construction) that require a large investment of cash. The primary benefit to
the issuing entity (i.e., the town or school district) is that cash can be obtained more quickly than, for
example, collecting taxes and fees over a long period of time. This allows the project to be completed
sooner, which is a benefit to the community.
Municipal bonds, like other bonds, pay periodic interest based on the stated interest rate and the face
value at the end of the bond term. However, corporate bonds often pay a higher rate of interest than
municipal bonds. Despite the lower interest rate, one benefit of municipal bonds relates to the tax
treatment of the periodic interest payments for investors. With corporate bonds, the periodic interest
payments are considered taxable income to the investor. For example, if an investor receives $1,000 of
interest and is in the 25% tax bracket, the investor will have to pay $250 of taxes on the interest, leaving
the investor with an after-tax payment of $750. With municipal bonds, interest payments are exempt
from federal tax. So the same investor receiving $1,000 of interest from a municipal bond would pay no
income tax on the interest income. This tax-exempt status of municipal bonds allows the entity to attract
investors and fund projects more easily.

Interest Payment: Issued When Market Rate Equals Contract Rate
Recall that the Balance Sheet presentation of the bond when the market rate equals the stated rate is as
follows:

In this example, the company issued 100 bonds with a face value of $1,000, a 5-year term, and a stated interest
rate of 5% when the market rate was 5% and received $100,000. As previously discussed, since the bonds were
sold when the market rate equals the stated rate, the carrying value of the bonds is $100,000. These bonds did
not specify when interest was paid, so we can assume that it is an annual payment. If the bonds were issued
on January 1, the company would pay interest on December 31 and the journal entry would be:

The interest expense is calculated by taking the Carrying Value ($100,000) multiplied by the market interest
rate (5%). The stated rate is used when calculating the interest cash payment. The company is obligated by the

836

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

bond indenture to pay 5% per year based on the face value of the bond. When the situation changes and the
bond is sold at a discount or premium, it is easy to get confused and incorrectly use the market rate here.
Since the market rate and the stated rate are the same in this example, we do not have to worry about any
differences between the amount of interest expense and the cash paid to bondholders. This journal entry will
be made every year for the 5-year life of the bond.
When performing these calculations, the rate is adjusted for more frequent interest payments. If the company
had issued 5% bonds that paid interest semiannually, interest payments would be made twice a year, but each
interest payment would only be half an annual interest payment. Earning interest for a full year at 5% annually
is the equivalent of receiving half of that amount each six months. So, for semiannual payments, we would
divide 5% by 2 and pay 2.5% every six months.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Mortgage Debt
According to Statista (https://openstax.org/l/50Statista) the amount of mortgage debt—debt incurred to
purchase homes—in the United States was $14.9 trillion on 2017. This value does not include the interest
cost—the cost of borrowing—related to the debt.
A common loan term for those borrowing money to buy a house is 30 years. Each month, the borrower
must make payments on the loan, which would add up to 360 payments for a 30-year loan. Recall from
previous discussions on amortization that each payment can be divided into two components: the
interest expense and the amount that is applied to reduce the principal.
In order to calculate the amount of interest and principal reduction for each payment, banks and
borrowers often use amortization tables. While amortization tables are easily created in Microsoft Excel
or other spreadsheet applications, there are many websites that have easy-to-use amortization tables.
The popular lending website Zillow (https://openstax.org/l/50Zillow) has a loan calculator to calculate
the monthly payments of a loan as well as an amortization table that shows how much interest and
principal reduction is applied for each payment.
For example, borrowing $200,000 for 30 years at an interest rate of 5% would require the borrow to repay
a total $386,513. The monthly payment on this loan is $1,073.64. This amount represents the $200,000
borrowed and $186,513 of interest cost. If the borrower chose a 15-year loan, the total payments drops
significantly to $266,757, but the monthly payments increase to $1,581.59.
Because interest is calculated based on the outstanding loan balance, the amount of interest paid in the
first payment is much more than the amount of interest in the final payment. The pie charts below show
the amount of the $1,073.64 payment allocated to interest and loan reduction for the first and final
payments, respectively, on the 30-year loan.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

837

Interest Payment: Issued at a Premium
Recall that the Balance Sheet presentation of the bond when the market rate at issue is lower than the stated
rate is as follows:

In this scenario, the sale price of a $1,000, 5-year bond with a stated rate of 5% and a market rate of 4% was
$1,044.60. If the company sold 100 of these bonds, it would receive $104,460 and the journal entry would be:

Again, let’s assume that the bonds pay interest annually. At the end of the bond’s year, we would record the
interest expense:

The interest expense determination is calculated using the effective interest amortization interest method.
Under the effective-interest method, the interest expense is calculated by taking the Carrying (or Book) Value
($104,460) multiplied by the market interest rate (4%). The amount of the cash payment in this example is
calculated by taking the face value of the bond ($100,000) multiplied by the stated rate.
Since the market rate and the stated rate are different, we need to account for the difference between the

838

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

amount of interest expense and the cash paid to bondholders. The amount of the premium amortization is
simply the difference between the interest expense and the cash payment. Another way to think about
amortization is to understand that, with each cash payment, we need to reduce the amount carried on the
books in the Bond Premium account. Since we originally credited Bond Premium when the bonds were issued,
we need to debit the account each time the interest is paid to bondholders because the carrying value of the
bond has changed. Note that the company received more for the bonds than face value, but it is only paying
interest on $100,000.
The partial effect of the first period’s interest payment on the company’s accounting equation in year one is:

And the financial-statement presentation at the end of year 1 is:

The journal entry for year 2 is:

The interest expense is calculated by taking the Carrying (or Book) Value ($103,638) multiplied by the market
interest rate (4%). The amount of the cash payment in this example is calculated by taking the face value of the
bond ($100,000) multiplied by the stated rate (5%). Since the market rate and the stated rate are different, we
again need to account for the difference between the amount of interest expense and the cash paid to
bondholders.
The partial effect on the accounting equation in year two is:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

839

And the financial-statement presentation at the end of year 2 is:

By the end of the 5th year, the bond premium will be zero, and the company will only owe the Bonds Payable
amount of $100,000.

LINK TO LEARNING
A mortgage calculator (https://openstax.org/l/50MortgageCalc) provides monthly payment estimates for
a long-term loan like a mortgage. To use the calculator, enter the cost of the house to be purchased, the
amount of cash to be borrowed, the number of years over which the mortgage is to be paid back
(generally 30 years), and the current interest rate. The calculator returns the amount of the mortgage
payment. Mortgages are long-term liabilities that are used to finance real estate purchases. We tend to
think of them as home loans, but they can also be used for commercial real estate purchases.

Interest Payment: Issued at a Discount
Recall that the Balance Sheet presentation of the bond when the market rate at issue was higher than the
stated rate is as follows:

We found the sale price of a $1,000, 5-year bond with a stated interest rate of 5% and a market rate of 7% was
$918.00. We then showed the journal entry to record sale of 100 bonds:

840

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

At the end of the bond’s first year, we make this journal entry:

The interest expense is calculated by taking the Carrying Value ($91,800) multiplied by the market interest rate
(7%). The amount of the cash payment in this example is calculated by taking the face value of the bond
($100,000) and multiplying it by the stated rate (5%). Since the market rate and the stated rate are different, we
need to account for the difference between the amount of interest expense and the cash paid to bondholders.
The amount of the discount amortization is simply the difference between the interest expense and the cash
payment. Since we originally debited Bond Discount when the bonds were issued, we need to credit the
account each time the interest is paid to bondholders because the carrying value of the bond has changed.
Note that the company received less for the bonds than face value but is paying interest on the $100,000.
The partial effect on the accounting equation in year one is:

And the financial-statement presentation at the end of year 1 is:

The journal entry for year 2 is:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

841

The interest expense is calculated by taking the Carrying Value ($93,226) multiplied by the market interest rate
(7%). The amount of the cash payment in this example is calculated by taking the face value of the bond
($100,000) multiplied by the stated rate (5%). Again, we need to account for the difference between the
amount of interest expense and the cash paid to bondholders by crediting the Bond Discount account.
The partial effect on the accounting equation in year two is:

And the financial statement presentation at the end of year 2 is:

By the end of the 5th year, the bond premium will be zero and the company will only owe the Bonds Payable
amount of $100,000.

Retirement of Bonds When the Bonds Were Issued at Par
At some point, a company will need to record bond retirement, when the company pays the obligation. Often,
they will retire bonds when they mature. For example, earlier we demonstrated the issuance of a five-year
bond, along with its first two interest payments. If we had carried out recording all five interest payments, the
next step would have been the maturity and retirement of the bond. At this stage, the bond issuer would pay
the maturity value of the bond to the owner of the bond, whether that is the original owner or a secondary
investor.
This example demonstrates the least complicated method of a bond issuance and retirement at maturity.
There are other possibilities that can be much more complicated and beyond the scope of this course. For
example, a bond might be callable by the issuing company, in which the company may pay a call premium paid
to the current owner of the bond. Also, a bond might be called while there is still a premium or discount on the
bond, and that can complicate the retirement process. Situations like these will be addressed in later
accounting courses.
To continue with our example, assume that the company issued 100 bonds with a face value of $1,000, a 5-year
term, and a stated interest rate of 5% when the market rate was 5% and received $100,000. It was recorded in
this way:

842

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

At the end of 5 years, the company will retire the bonds by paying the amount owed. To record this action, the
company would debit Bonds Payable and credit Cash. Remember that the bond payable retirement debit entry
will always be the face amount of the bonds since, when the bond matures, any discount or premium will have
been completely amortized.

13.4

Appendix: Special Topics Related to Long-Term Liabilities

Here we will address some special topics related to long-term liabilities.

Brief Comparison between Equity and Debt Financing
Although we briefly addressed equity versus debt financing in Explain the Pricing of Long-Term Liabilities, we
will now review the two options. Let’s consider Maria, who wants to buy a business. The venture is for sale for
$1 million, but she only has $200,000. What are her options? In this situation, a business owner can use debt
financing by borrowing money or equity financing by selling part of the company, or she can use a
combination of both.
Debt financing means borrowing money that will be repaid on a specific date in the future. Many companies
have started by incurring debt. To decide whether this is a viable option, the owners need to determine
whether they can afford the monthly payments to repay the debt. One positive to this scenario is that interest
paid on the debt is tax deductible and can lower the company’s tax liability. On the other hand, businesses can
struggle to make these payments every month, especially as they are starting out.
With equity financing, a business owner sells part of the business to obtain money to finance business
operations. With this type of financing, the original owner gives up some portion of ownership in the company
in return for cash. In Maria’s case, partners would supplement her $200,000 and would then own a share of
the business. Each partner’s share is based on their financial or other contributions.
If a business owner forms a corporation, each owner will receive shares of stock. Typically, those making the
largest financial investment have the largest say in decisions about business operations. The issuance of
dividends should also be considered in this set-up. Paying dividends to shareholders is not tax deductible, but
dividend payments are also not required. Additionally, a company does not have to buy back any stock it sells.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

843

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Debt versus Equity Financing
Many start-ups and small companies with just one or two owners struggle to obtain the cash to run their
operations. Owners may want to use lending, or debt financing, to obtain the money to run operations,
but have to turn to investors, or equity financing. Ethical and legal obligations to investors are typically
greater than ethical and legal obligations to lenders. This is because a company’s owners have an ethical
and legal responsibility to take investors’ interests into account when making business decisions, even if
the decision is not in the founding owners’ best interest. The primary obligation to lenders, however, is
only to pay back the money borrowed with interest. When determining which type of financing is
appropriate for a business operation, the different ethical and legal obligations between having lenders
or investors need to be considered.

[9]

Equity Financing
For a corporation, equity financing involves trading or selling shares of stock in the business to raise funds to
run the business. For a sole proprietorship, selling part of the business means it is no longer a sole
proprietorship: the subsequent transaction could create either a corporation or partnership. The owners
would choose which of the two to create. Equity means ownership. However, business owners can be creative
in selling interest in their venture. For example, Maria might sell interest in the building housing her candy
store and retain all revenues for herself, or she may decide to share interest in the operations (sales revenues)
and retain sole ownership of the building.
The main benefit of financing with equity is that the business owner is not required to pay back the invested
funds, so revenue can be re-invested in the company’s growth. Companies funded this way are also more
likely to succeed through their initial years. The Small Business Administration suggests a new business should
have access to enough cash to operate for six months without having to borrow. The disadvantages of this
funding method are that someone else owns part of the business and, depending on the arrangement, may
have ideas that conflict with the original owner’s ideas but that cannot be disregarded.
The following characteristics are specific to equity financing:
1. No required payment to owners or shareholders; dividends or other distributions are optional. Stock
owners typically invest in stocks for two reasons: the dividends that many stocks pay or the appreciation
in the market value of the stocks. For example, a stock holder might buy Walmart stock for $100 per share
with the expectation of selling it for much more than $100 per share at some point in the future.
2. Ownership interest held by the original or current owners can be diluted by issuing additional new shares
of common stock.
3. Unlike bonds that mature, common stocks do not have a definite life. To convert the stock to cash, some
of the shares must be sold.
4. In the past, common stocks were typically sold in even 100-share lots at a given market price per share.
However, with Internet brokerages today, investors can buy any particular quantity they want.

9 Nolo. “Financing a Small Business: Equity or Debt?” Forbes. January 5, 2007. https://www.forbes.com/2007/01/05/equity-debtsmallbusiness-ent-fin-cx_nl_0105nolofinancing.html#bd27de55819f

844

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

Debt Financing
As you have learned, debt is an obligation to pay back an amount of money at some point in the future.
Generally, a term of less than one year is considered short-term, and a term of one year or longer is
considered long-term. Borrowing money for college or a car with a promise to pay back the amount to the
lender generates debt. Formal debt involves a signed written document with a due date, an interest rate, and
the amount of the loan. A student loan is an example of a formal debt.
The following characteristics are specific to debt financing:
1. The company is required to make timely interest payments to the holders of the bonds or notes payable.
2. The interest in cash that is to be paid by the company is generally locked in at the agreed-upon rate, and
thus the same dollar payments will be made over the life of the bond. Virtually all bonds will have a
maturity point. When the bond matures, the maturity value, which was the same as the contract or
issuance value, is paid to whoever owns the bond.
3. The interest paid is deductible on the company’s income tax return.
4. Bonds or notes payable do not dilute the company’s ownership interest. The holders of the long-term
liabilities do not have an ownership interest.
5. Bonds are typically sold in $1,000 increments.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Short-Term Debt
Businesses sometimes offer lines of credit (short-term debt) to their customers. For example, Wilson
Sporting Goods offers open credit to tennis clubs around the country. When the club needs more tennis
balls, a club manager calls Wilson and says, “I’d like to order some tennis balls.” The person at Wilson
says, “What’s your account number,” and takes the order. Wilson does not ask the manager to sign a
note but does expect to be paid back. If the club does not pay within 120 days, Wilson will not let them
order more items until the bill is paid. Ordering on open credit makes transactions simpler for the club
and for Wilson, since there is not a need to formalize every order. But collecting on the amount might be
difficult for Wilson if the club delays payment. For this reason, typically customers must fill out
applications, or have a history with the vendor to go on open credit.

Effect of Interest Points and Loan Term in Years on a Loan
A mortgage loan is typically a long-term loan initiated by a potential home buyer through a mortgage lender.
These lenders can be banks and other financial institutions or specialized mortgage lenders. Figure 13.11
shows some examples of the major categories of loans. The table demonstrates some interesting
characteristics of home loans.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

Figure 13.11

845

Home Loans. There are a number of different types of mortgages, each with varying interest

rates, based on the individual loan characteristics. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The first characteristic is that loans can be classified into several categories. One category is the length of the
loan, usually 15 years, 20 years, or 30 years. Some mortgages lock in a fixed interest rate for the life of the
loan, while others only lock in the rate for a period of time. An adjustable rate mortgage (ARM), such as a
5-year or 7-year ARM, locks in the interest rate for 5 or 7 years. After that period, the interest rate adjusts to
the market rate, which could be higher or lower. Some loans are based on the fair market value (FMV) of the
home. For example, above a certain purchase price, the mortgage would be considered a jumbo loan, with a
slightly higher interest rate than a conforming loan with a lower FMV.
The second characteristic demonstrated by the table is the concept of points. People pay points up front (at the
beginning of the loan) to secure a lower interest rate when they take out a home loan. For example, potential
borrowers might be informed by their loan officer that they could secure a 30-year loan at 5.0%, with no points
or a 30-year loan at 4.75% by paying one point. A point is 1% of the amount of the loan. For example, one point
on a $100,000 loan would be $1,000.
Whether or not buying down a lower interest rate by paying points is a smart financial move is beyond the
scope of this course. However, when you take a real estate course or decide to buy and finance a home, you
will want to conduct your own research on the function of points in a mortgage.
The third and final characteristic is that when you apply for and secure a home loan, there will typically be an
assortment of other costs that you will pay, such as loan origination fees and a survey fee, for example. These
additional costs are reflected in the loan’s annual percentage rate (or APR). These additional costs are
considered part of the costs of the loan and explain why the APR rates in the table are higher than the interest
rates listed for each loan.
Figure 13.11 shows data from the Wells Fargo website. You will notice that there is a column for “Interest Rate”
and a column for “APR.” Why does a 30-year loan have an interest rate of 4.375% with an APR of 4.435%? The
difference results from compound interest.
Borrowing $100,000 for one year at 4.0%, with interest compounded yearly, would lead to $4,000 owed in
interest. But since mortgages are compounded monthly, a mortgage of $100,000 would generate $4,073.70 in

846

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

interest in a year.

Summary of Bond Principles
As we conclude our discussion of bonds, there are two principles that are worth noting. The first principle is
there is an inverse relationship between the market rate of interest and the price of the bond. That is, when
the market interest rate increases, the price of the bond decreases. This is due to the fact that the stated rate
of the bond does not change.

[10]

As we discussed, when the market interest rate is higher than the stated

interest rate of the bond, the bond will sell at a discount to attract investors and to compensate for the interest
rate earned between similar bonds. When, on the other hand, the market interest rate is lower than the stated
interest rate, the bond will sell at a premium, which also compensates for the interest rate earned between
similar bonds. It may be helpful to think of the inverse relationship between the market interest rate and the
bond price in terms of analogies such as a teeter-totter in a park or a balance scale, as shown in Figure 13.12.

Figure 13.12

Bond Stated Rate. This illustration demonstrates the relationship between the market interest

rate and the selling price of bonds. When the market interest rate goes down, the selling price goes up. The
opposite is also true. (credit: modification of “Balance scale MET DP318014” gift of Mr. and Mrs. Stuart P. Feld,
2013 to Metropolitan Museum of Art/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0)
In reality, the market interest rate will be above or below the stated interest rate and is rarely equal to the
stated rate. The point of this illustration is to help demonstrate the inverse relationship between the market
interest rate and the bond selling price.
A second principle relating to bonds involves the relationship of the bond carrying value relative to its face
value. By reviewing the amortization tables for bonds sold at a discount and bonds sold at a premium it is clear
that the carrying value of bonds will always move toward the face value of the bond. This occurs because
interest expense (using the effective-interest method) is calculated using the bond carrying value, which
changes each period.

10

Another reason for the inverse relationship between the market interest rate and bond prices is due to the time value of money.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

847

For example, earlier we explored a 5-year, $100,000 bond that sold for $104,460. Return to the amortization
table in Figure 13.9 and notice the ending value on the bond is equal to the bond face value of $100,000
(ignoring the rounding difference). The same is true for bonds sold at a discount. In our example, the $100,000
bond sold at $91,800 and the carrying value in year five was $100,000. Understanding that the carrying value of
bonds will always move toward the bond face value is one trick students can use to ensure the amortization
table and related accounting are correct. If, on the maturity date, the bond carrying value does not equal the
bond face value, something is incorrect.
Let’s summmarize bond characteristics, When businesses borrow money from banks or other investors, the
terms of the arrangement, which include the frequency of the periodic interest payments, the interest rate,
and the maturity value, are specified in the bond indentures or loan documents. Recall, too, that when the
bonds are issued, the bond indenture only specifies how much the borrower will repay the lender on the
maturity date. The amount of money received by the business (borrower) during the issue is called the bond
proceeds. The bond proceeds can be impacted by the market interest rate at the time the bonds are sold. Also,
because of the lag time between preparing a bond issuance and selling the bonds, the market dynamics may
cause the stated interest rate to change. Rarely, the market rate is equal to the stated rate when the bonds are
sold, and the bond proceeds will equal the face value of the bonds. More commonly, the market rate is not
equal to the stated rate. If the market rate is higher than the stated rate when the bonds are sold, the bonds
will be sold at a discount. If the market rate is lower than the stated rate when the bonds are sold, the bonds
will be sold at a premium. Figure 13.10 illustrates this rule: that bond prices are inversely related to the market
interest rate.

848

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

Key Terms
amortization allocation of the costs of intangible assets over their useful economic lives; also, process of
separating the principal and interest in loan payments over the life of a loan
bond type of financial instrument that a company issues directly to investors, bypassing banks or other
lending institutions, with a promise to pay the investor a specified rate of interest over a specified period
of time
bond indenture contract that lists the features of the bond, such as the principal, the maturity date, and the
interest rate
bond retirement when the company that issued the bonds pays their obligation
book value difference between the asset’s value (cost) and accumulated depreciation; also, value at which
assets or liabilities are recorded in a company’s financial statements
callable bond (also, redeemable bond) bond that can be repurchased or “called” by the issuer of the bond
before its due date
carrying value (also, book value) value that assets or liabilities are recorded at in the company’s financial
statements
compound interest in a loan, when interest earned also earns interest
convertible bond bond that can be converted into common stock at the option of the bond holder
coupon rate (also, stated interest rate or face rate) interest rate printed on the certificate, used to determine
the amount of interest paid to the holder of the bond
debenture bond backed by the general credit worthiness of a company rather than specific assets
debt financing borrowing money that will be repaid on a specific date in the future in order to finance
business operations
default failure to pay a debt as promised
discount on bonds payable contra liability account associated with a bond that has a stated rate that is
lower than the market rate and is sold at a discount
effective-interest method method of calculating interest expense based on multiplying the carrying value
of the bond by the market interest rate
equity financing selling part of the business to obtain money to finance business operations
fully amortized notes periodic loan payments that pay back the principal and interest over time with
payments of equal amounts
interest-only loan type of loan that only requires regular interest payments with all the principal due at
maturity
long-term liability debt settled outside one year or one operating cycle, whichever is longer
market interest rate (also, effective interest rate) rate determined by supply and demand and by the credit
worthiness of the borrower
maturity date date a bond or note becomes due and payable
maturity value amount to be paid at the maturity date
note payable legal document between a borrower and a lender specifying terms of a financial arrangement;
in most situations, the debt is long-term
par value value assigned to stock in the company’s charter, typically set at a very small arbitrary amount;
serves as legal capital
premium on bonds payable contra account associated with a bond that has a stated rate that is higher than
the market rate and is sold at a premium
principal face value or maturity value of a bond (the amount to be paid at maturity); also, initial borrowed

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

849

amount of a loan, not including interest
promissory note represents a personal loan agreement that is a formal contract between a lender and
borrower
putable bond bond that give the bondholder the right to decide whether to sell it back early or keep it until
it matures
secondary market organized market where previously issued stocks and bonds can be traded after they are
issued
secured bond bond backed by specific assets as collateral for the bond
serial bond bond that will mature over a period of time and will be repaid in a series of payments
stated interest rate (also, contract interest rate) interest rate printed on the face of the bond that the issuer
agrees to pay the bondholder throughout the term of the bond; also known as the coupon rate and face
rate
straight-line method method of calculating interest expense that allocates the same amount of premium or
discount amortation for each of the bond’s payment periods
term bond bond that will be repaid all at once, rather than in a series of payments

Summary
13.1 Explain the Pricing of Long-Term Liabilities
• Businesses can obtain financing (cash) through profitable operations, issuing (selling) debt, and by selling
ownership (equity).
• Notes payable and bonds payable are specific types of debt that businesses issue in order to generate
financial capital.
• Liabilities are categorized as either current or noncurrent based on when the liability will be settled
relative to the operating period of the business.
• A bond indenture is a legal document containing the principal amount, maturity date, stated interest rate
and other requirements of the bond issuer.
• Bonds can be issued under different structures and include different features.
• Periodic interest payments are based on the amount borrowed, the interest rate, and the time period for
which interest is calculated.
• Bond selling prices are determined by the market interest rate at the time of the sale and the stated
interest rate of the bond.
• Bonds can be sold at face value, at a premium, or at a discount.
13.2 Compute Amortization of Long-Term Liabilities Using the Effective-Interest Method
• The effective-interest method is a common method used to calculate the interest expense for a given
interest payment.
• There is an inverse relationship between the price of a bond and the market interest rate.
• The carrying value of a bond sold at a discount will increase during the life of a bond until the maturity or
face value is reached.
• The carrying value of a bond sold at a premium will decrease during the life of a bond until the maturity
or face value is reached.
• The amount of cash to be paid, the interest expense, and the premium or discount amortization (when
applicable) with each periodic payment are calculated based on an amortization table or schedule.
13.3 Prepare Journal Entries to Reflect the Life Cycle of Bonds
• When a company issues a bond, the specific terms of the bond are contained in the bond indenture.

850

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

• Journal entries are recorded at various stages of a bond, including when the bond is issued, for periodic
interest payments, and for payment of the bond at maturity.
• The difference between the face value of a bond and the cash proceeds are recorded in the discount
(when the proceeds are lower than the face value) and premium (when the proceeds are higher than the
face value) accounts.
• The carrying or book value of a bond is determined by the balances of the Bond Payable and Discount
and/or Premium accounts.
• Interest expense associated with a bond interest payment is calculated by the bond’s carrying or book
value multiplied by the market interest rate.

Multiple Choice
1.

13.1 An amortization table ________.
A.

breaks each payment into the amount that goes toward interest and the amount that goes toward the
principal

B.

is a special table used in a break room to make people feel equitable

C.

separates time value of money tables into present value and future value

D.

separates time value of money tables into single amounts and streams of cash

2.

13.1 A debenture is ________.
A.

the interest paid on a bond

B.

a type of bond that can be sold back to the issuing company whenever the bondholder wishes

C.

a bond with only the company’s word that they will pay it back

D.

a bond with assets such as land to back their word that they will pay it back

3.

13.1 The principal of a bond is ________.
A.

the person who sold the bond for the company

B.

the person who bought the bond

C.

the interest rate printed on the front of the bond

D.

the face amount of the bond that will be paid back at maturity

4.

13.1 A convertible bond can be converted into ________.
A.

preferred stock

B.

common stock and then converted into preferred stock

C.

common stock of a different company

D.

common stock of the company

5.

13.1 On January 1, a company issued a 5-year $100,000 bond at 6%. Interest payments on the bond of

$6,000 are to be made annually. If the company received proceeds of $112,300, how would the bond’s issuance
be quoted?
A.

1.123

B.

112.30

C.

0.890

D.

89.05

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

6.

851

13.1 On July 1, a company sells 8-year $250,000 bonds with a stated interest rate of 6%. If interest

payments are paid annually, each interest payment will be ________.
A.

$120,000

B.

$60,000

C.

$7,500

D.

$15,000

7.

13.1 On January 1 a company issues a $75,000 bond that pays interest semi-annually. The first interest

payment of $1,875 is paid on July 1. What is the stated annual interest rate on the bond?
A.

5.00%

B.

2.50%

C.

1.25%

D.

10.00%

8.

13.1 On October 1 a company sells a 3-year, $2,500,000 bond with an 8% stated interest rate. Interest is

paid quarterly and the bond is sold at 89.35. On October 1 the company would collect ________.
A.

$200,000

B.

$558,438

C.

$2,233,750

D.

$6,701,250

9.

13.1 On April 1 a company sells a 5-year, $60,000 bond with a 7% stated interest rate. The market interest

on that day was also 7%. If interest is paid quarterly, the company makes interest payments of ________.
A.

$1,050

B.

$3,150

C.

$4,200

D.

$5,250

10.

13.2 The effective-interest method of bond amortization finds the difference between the ________ times

the ________ and the ________ times the ________.
A.

stated interest rate, principal, stated interest rate, carrying value

B.

stated interest rate, principal, market interest rate, carrying value

C.

stated interest rate, carrying value, market interest rate, principal

D.

market interest rate, carrying value, market interest rate, principal

11.

13.2 When a bond sells at a discount, the carrying value ________ after each amortization entry.
A.

increases

B.

decreases

C.

stays the same

D.

cannot be determined

12.

13.2 The International Financial Reporting Standards require the use of ________.
A.

any method of amortization of bond premiums

B.

the straight-line method of amortization of bond discounts

C.

the effective-interest method of amortization of bond premiums and discounts

D.

any method approved by US GAAP

852

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

13.

13.2 The cash interest payment a corporation makes to its bondholders is based on ________.
A.

the market rate times the carrying value

B.

the stated rate times the principal

C.

the stated rate times the carrying value

D.

the market rate times the principal

14.

13.2 Whirlie Inc. issued $300,000 face value, 10% paid annually, 10-year bonds for $319,251 when the

market of interest was 9%. The company uses the effective-interest method of amortization. At the end of the
year, the company will record ________.
A.

a credit to cash for $28,733

B.

a debit to interest expense for $31,267

C.

a debit to Discount on Bonds Payable for $1,267

D.

a debit to Premium on Bonds Payable for $1.267

15.

13.3 Naval Inc. issued $200,000 face value bonds at a discount and received $190,000. At the end of

2018, the balance in the Discount on Bonds Payable account is $5,000. This year’s balance sheet will show a net
liability of ________.
A.

$200,000

B.

$180,000

C.

$195,000

D.

$205,000

16.

13.3 Keys Inc. issued 100 bonds with a face value of $1,000 and a rate of 8% at $1,025 each. The journal

entry to record this transaction includes ________.
A.

a credit to Bonds Payable for $102,500

B.

a credit to cash for $102,500

C.

a debit to cash for $100,000

D.

a credit to Premium on Bonds Payable for $2,500

17.

13.3 Huang Inc. issued 100 bonds with a face value of $1,000 and a 5-year term at $960 each. The

journal entry to record this transaction includes ________.
A.

a debit to Bonds Payable for $100,000

B.

a debit to Discount on Bonds Payable for $4,000

C.

a credit to cash for $96,000

D.

a credit to Discount on Bonds Payable for $4,000

18.

13.3 O’Shea Inc. issued bonds at a face value of $100,000, a rate of 6%, and a 5-year term for $98,000.

From this information, we know that the market rate of interest was ________.
A.

more than 6%

B.

less than 6%

C.

equal to 6%

D.

cannot be determined from the information given.

19.

13.3 Gingko Inc. issued bonds with a face value of $100,000, a rate of 7%, and a 10-yearterm for

$103,000. From this information, we know that the market rate of interest was ________.
A.

more than 7%

B.

less than 7%

C.

equal to 7%

D.

equal to 1.3%

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

20.

853

13.4 The difference between equity financing and debt financing is that
A.

equity financing involves borrowing money.

B.

equity financing involves selling part of the company.

C.

debt financing involves selling part of the company.

D.

debt financing means the company has no debt.

Questions
1.

13.1 What is the difference between callable and putable bonds?

2.

13.1 What is the difference between serial bonds and term bonds?

3.

13.1 What is a junk bond?

4.

13.1 How are savings bonds different from a corporate bond?

5.

13.1 What do you have to do to the interest rate and years of maturity if a bond pricing problem tells you

that interest is compounded quarterly?
6.

13.2 An amortization table/schedule is created to compute the amount to be amortized each year. What

are the four columns needed to prepare the table?
7.

13.2 In the amortization table, how is the amortization of discount of premium computed?

8.

13.2 Does issuing a bond at a discount increase or decrease interest expense over the life of the bond?

9.

13.2 What kind of account is the Discount on Bonds Payable? What kind of account is the Premium on

Bonds Payable?
10.

13.2 Why is the effective-interest method of amortization required under the International Financial

Reporting Standards?
11.

13.3 If there is neither a premium nor discount present, the journal entry to record bond interest

payments is _______.
12.

13.3 When do you use the Bond Discount Account?

13.

13.3 A company issued bonds with a $100,000 face value, a 5-year term, a stated rate of 6%, and a

market rate of 7%. Interest is paid annually. What is the amount of interest the bondholders will receive at the
end of the year?
14.

13.3 A company issued $100,000, 5-year bonds, receiving $97,000. What is the balance sheet

presentation immediately after the sale?
15.

13.3 Does interest expense increase or decrease when a bond premium is amortized?

Exercise Set A
EA1.

13.1 Halep Inc. borrowed $30,000 from Davis Bank and signed a 4-year note payable stating the

interest rate was 4% compounded annually. Halep Inc. will make payments of $8,264.70 at the end of each
year. Prepare an amortization table showing the principal and interest in each payment.

854

EA2.

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

13.1 Beluga Inc. issued 10-year bonds with a face value of $100,000 and a stated rate of 3% when the

market rate was 4%. Interest was paid annually. The bonds were sold at 87.5. What was the sales price of the
bonds? Were they issued at a discount, a premium, or at par?
EA3.

13.1 Krystian Inc. issued 10-year bonds with a face value of $100,000 and a stated rate of 4% when the

market rate was 6%. Interest was paid semi-annually. Calculate and explain the timing of the cash flows the
purchaser of the bonds (the investor) will receive throughout the bond term. Would an investor be willing to
pay more or less than face value for this bond?
EA4.

13.1 On January 1, 2018, Wawatosa Inc. issued 5-year bonds with a face value of $200,000 and a stated

interest rate of 12% payable semi-annually on July 1 and January 1. The bonds were sold to yield 10%.
Assuming the bonds were sold at 107.732, what is the selling price of the bonds? Were they issued at a
discount or a premium?
EA5.

13.2 Diana Inc. issued $100,000 of its 9%, 5-year bonds for $96,149 when the market rate was 10%. The

bonds pay interest semi-annually. Prepare an amortization table for the first three payments.
EA6.

13.2 Oak Branch Inc. issued $700,000 of 5%, 10-year bonds when the market rate was 4%. They

received $757,243. Interest was paid semi-annually. Prepare an amortization table for the first three years of
the bonds.
EA7.

13.3 On Jan. 1, Year 1, Foxcroft Inc. issued 100 bonds with a face value of $1,000 for $104,000. The

bonds had a stated rate of 6% and paid interest semiannually. What is the journal entry to record the issuance
of the bonds?
EA8.

13.3 Medhurst Corporation issued $90,000 in bonds for $87,000. The bonds had a stated rate of 8%

and pay interest quarterly. What is the journal entry to record the sale of the bonds?
EA9.

13.3 On Jan. 1, Year 1, Foxcroft Inc. issued 100 bonds with a face value of $1,000 for $104,000. The

bonds had a stated rate of 6% and paid interest semi-annually. What is the journal entry to record the first
payment to the bondholders?
EA10.

13.3 Pinetop Corporation issued $150,000 10-year bonds at par. The bonds have a stated rate of 6%

and pay interest annually. What is the journal entry to record the sale of the bonds?
EA11.

13.3 Medhurst Corporation issued $90,000 in bonds for $87,000. The bonds had a stated rate of 8%

and pay interest quarterly. What is the journal entry to record the first interest payment?

B

EB1.

Exercise Set B
13.1 Sharapovich Inc. borrowed $50,000 from Kerber Bank and signed a 5-year note payable stating

the interest rate was 5% compounded annually. Sharapovich Inc. will make payments of $11,548.74 at the end
of each year. Prepare an amortization table showing the principal and interest in each payment.
EB2.

13.1 Waylan Sisters Inc. issued 3-year bonds with a par value of $100,000 and a 6% annual coupon

when the market rate of interest was 5%. If the bonds sold at 102.438, how much cash did Williams Sisters Inc.
receive from issuing the bonds?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

EB3.

855

13.1 Smashing Cantaloupes Inc. issued 5-year bonds with a par value of $35,000 and an 8% semi-

annual coupon (payable June 30 and December 31) on January 1, 2018, when the market rate of interest was
10%. Were the bonds issued at a discount or premium? Assuming the bonds sold at 92.288, what was the sales
price of the bonds?
EB4.

13.1 Chung Inc. issued $50,000 of 3-year bonds on January 1, 2018, with a stated rate of 4% and a

market rate of 4%. The bonds paid interest semi-annually on June 30 and Dec. 31. How much money did the
company receive when the bonds were issued? The bonds would be quoted at what rate?
EB5.

13.2 Haiku Inc. issued $600,000 of 10-year bonds with a stated rate of 11% when the market rate was

12%. The bonds pay interest semi-annually. Prepare the first three years of an amortization schedule. Assume
that the bonds were issued for $565,710.
EB6.

13.2 Waldron Inc. issued $400,000 bonds with a stated rate of 7% when the market rate was 5%. They

are 3-year bonds with interest to be paid annually. Prepare a table to amortize the premium of the bonds.
Assume that the bonds were issued for $421,844.
EB7.

13.3 Willoughby Inc. issued 100 bonds with a face value of $1,000 and a stated rate of 4% and received

$105,000. What is the journal entry to record the sale of the bonds?
EB8.

13.3 Allante Corporate issued 50 bonds with a face value of $1,000 and a stated rate of 4% and

received $45,000. What is the journal entry to record the sale of the bonds?
EB9.

13.3 Roo Incorporated issued 50 bonds with a face value of $1,000 and a stated rate of 6% when the

market rate was 6%. What is the journal entry to record the sale of the bonds?
EB10.

13.3 Piedmont Corporation issued $200,000 of 10-year bonds at par. The bonds have a stated rate of

6% and pay interest annually. What is the journal entry to record the first interest payment to the
bondholders?
EB11.

13.3 Lunar Corporation issued $80,000 in bonds for $87,000 on Jan. 1. The bonds had a stated rate of

8% and pay interest quarterly. What is the journal entry to record the first interest payment?

Problem Set A
PA1.

13.3 On January 1, 2018, King Inc. borrowed $150,000 and signed a 5-year, note payable with a 10%

interest rate. Each annual payment is in the amount of $39,569 and payment is due each Dec. 31. What is the
journal entry on Jan. 1 to record the cash received and on Dec. 31 to record the annual payment? (You will
need to prepare the first row in the amortization table to determine the amounts.)
PA2.

13.1 On July 1, Somerset Inc. issued $200,000 of 10%, 10-year bonds when the market rate was 12%.

The bonds paid interest semi-annually. Assuming the bonds sold at 58.55, what was the selling price of the
bonds? Explain why the cash received from selling this bond is different from the $200,000 face value of the
bond.
PA3.

13.2 Eli Inc. issued $100,000 of 8% annual, 5-year bonds for $103,000. What is the total amount of

interest expense over the life of the bonds?
PA4.

13.2 Evie Inc. issued 50 bonds with a $1,000 face value, a five-year life, and a stated annual coupon of

6% for $980 each. What is the total amount of interest expense over the life of the bonds?

856

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

PA5.

13.3 Volunteer Inc. issued bonds with a $500,000 face value, 10% interest rate, and a 4-year term on

July 1, 2018 and received $540,000. Interest is payable annually. The premium is amortized using the straightline method. Prepare journal entries for the following transactions.
A.

July 1, 2018: entry to record issuing the bonds

B.

June 30, 2019: entry to record payment of interest to bondholders

C.

June 30, 2019: entry to record amortization of premium

D.

June 30, 2020: entry to record payment of interest to bondholders

E.

June 30, 2020: entry to record amortization of premium

PA6.

13.3 Aggies Inc. issued bonds with a $500,000 face value, 10% interest rate, and a 4-year term on July

1, 2018, and received $540,000. Interest is payable semi-annually. The premium is amortized using the straightline method. Prepare journal entries for the following transactions.
A.

July 1, 2018: entry to record issuing the bonds

B.

Dec. 31, 2018: entry to record payment of interest to bondholders

C.

Dec. 31, 2018: entry to record amortization of premium

Problem Set B

B

PB1.

13.3 Sub-Cinema Inc. borrowed $10,000 on Jan. 1 and will repay the loan with 12 equal payments

made at the end of the month for 12 months. The interest rate is 12% annually. If the monthly payments are
$888.49, what is the journal entry to record the cash received on Jan. 1 and the first payment made on Jan. 31?
PB2.

13.1 Charleston Inc. issued $200,000 bonds with a stated rate of 10%. The bonds had a 10-year

maturity date. Interest is to be paid semi-annually and the market rate of interest is 8%. If the bonds sold at
113.55, what amount was received upon issuance?
PB3.

13.2 Starmount Inc. sold bonds with a $50,000 face value, 12% interest, and 10-year term at $48,000.

What is the total amount of interest expense over the life of the bonds?
PB4.

13.2 Irving Inc. sold bonds with a $50,000, 10% interest, and 10-year term at $52,000. What is the total

amount of interest expense over the life of the bonds?
PB5.

13.3 Dixon Inc. issued bonds with a $500,000 face value, 10% interest rate, and a 4-year term on July 1,

2018 and received $480,000. Interest is payable annually. The discount is amortized using the straight-line
method. Prepare journal entries for the following transactions.
A.

July 1, 2018: entry to record issuing the bonds

B.

June 30, 2019: entry to record payment of interest to bondholders

C.

June 30, 2019: entry to record amortization of discount

D.

June 30, 2020: entry to record payment of interest to bondholders

E.

June 30, 2020: entry to record amortization of discount

PB6.

13.3 Edward Inc. issued bonds with a $500,000 face value, 10% interest rate, and a 4-year term on July

1, 2018 and received $480,000. Interest is payable semiannually. The discount is amortized using the straightline method. Prepare journal entries for the following transactions.
A.

July 1, 2018: entry to record issuing the bonds

B.

Dec. 31, 2018: entry to record payment of interest to bondholders

C.

Dec. 31, 2018: entry to record amortization of discount

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

857

Thought Provokers
TP1.

13.1 It is somewhat difficult to find current quotes on corporate bonds, but one source is the Financial

Industry Regulatory Authority. Using the link http://finra-markets.morningstar.com/BondCenter/Default.jsp,
click on the “Search” tab. Make sure “Bond Type” is set to “Corporate” and enter “Nike” in the “Issuer Name”
field and hit enter.
Write a brief summary explaining the results, including an explanation of each of the fields. Assume that an
investor purchases a $1,000 bond and interest payments are made semi-annually. Be sure to include the price
the investor would pay for the bond.
TP2.

13.2 Below is select information from two, independent companies.

Additional information includes:
• On January 1, Company A issued a 5-year $1,500,000 bond with at 6% stated rate. Interest is paid
semiannually and the bond was sold at 105.5055 to yield a market rate of 4.75%.
• On January 1, Company B sold $1,500,000 of common stock and paid dividends of $75,000.
A.

Prepare an income statement for each company (ignore taxes)

B.

Explain why the net income amounts are different, paying particular attention to the operational
performance and financing performance of each company. (Hint: it may be helpful for you to create an
amortization table).

TP3.

13.3 Assume you are a newly-hired accountant for a local manufacturing firm. You have enjoyed

working for the company and are looking forward to your first experience participating in the preparation of
the company’s financial statements for the year-ending December 31, the end of the company’s fiscal year.
As you are preparing your assigned journal entries, your supervisor approaches you and asks to speak with
you. Your supervisor is concerned because, based on her preliminary estimates, the company will fall just shy
of its financial targets for the year. If the estimates are true, this means that all 176 employees of the company
will not receive year-end bonuses, which represent a significant portion of their pay.
One of the entries that you will prepare involves the upcoming bond interest payment that will be paid on
January 15 of the next year. Your supervisor has calculated that, if the journal entry is dated on January 1 of the
following year rather than on December 31 of the current year, the company will likely meet its financial goals
thereby allowing all employees to receive year-end bonuses. Your supervisor asks you if you will consider
dating the journal entry on January 1 instead of December 31 of the current year. Assess the implications of
the various stakeholders and explain what your answer will be.

858

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 13 Long-Term Liabilities

14

Corporation Accounting
Figure 14.1 Stocks. Company stocks are traded daily across the globe. (credit: modification of “E-ticker” by
“klip game”/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Chapter Outline
14.1 Explain the Process of Securing Equity Financing through the Issuance of Stock
14.2 Analyze and Record Transactions for the Issuance and Repurchase of Stock
14.3 Record Transactions and the Effects on Financial Statements for Cash Dividends, Property Dividends,
Stock Dividends, and Stock Splits
14.4 Compare and Contrast Owners’ Equity versus Retained Earnings
14.5 Discuss the Applicability of Earnings per Share as a Method to Measure Performance

Why It Matters
Chad and Rick have experienced resounding success operating their three Mexican restaurants named La
Cantina. They are now ready to expand and open two more restaurants. The partners realize this will require
significant funds for leasing locations, purchasing and installing equipment, and setting up operations. They
have tentatively decided to form a new corporation for their future restaurant operations. The partners
researched some of the characteristics of corporations and have learned that a corporation can sell shares of
stock in exchange for funding their operations and buying new equipment. The sale of shares will dilute the
partners’ ownership interest in the restaurants but will enable them to finance the expansion without
borrowing any money.
Chad and Rick are not ready to go public with the offering of their shares because the three current
restaurants are not widely recognized. A public offering of the shares in a corporation is typically done when a
company is recognized and investment banks and venture capitalists can create enough interest for a large
number of investors. When a corporation is starting up, it shares are typically sold to friends and family, and

860

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

then to angel investors. Many successful companies, like Amazon and Dell, started this way.
Partners Chad and Rick locate possible investors and then share their restaurant’s financial information and
business plan. The investors will not participate in management or work at the restaurants, but they will be
stockholders along with Chad and Rick. Stockholders own part of the corporation by holding ownership in
shares of the corporation’s stock. The corporate form of business will enable Chad, Rick, and other
shareholders to minimize their liability. The most that the investors can lose is the amount they have invested
in the corporation. In addition, Chad and Rick will be able to receive a salary from the new corporation because
they will manage the operations, and all of the shareholders will be able to share in the corporation’s profits
through the receipt of dividends.
14.1

Explain the Process of Securing Equity Financing through the Issuance

of Stock
A corporation is a legal business structure involving one or more individuals (owners) who are legally distinct
(separate) from the business that is created under state laws. The owners of a corporation are called
stockholders (or shareholders) and may or may not be employees of the corporation. Most corporations rely
on a combination of debt (liabilities) and equity (stock) to raise capital. Both debt and equity financing have
the goal of obtaining funding, often referred to as capital, to be used to acquire other assets needed for
operations or expansion. Capital consists of the total cash and other assets owned by a company found on the
left side of the accounting equation. The method of financing these assets is evidenced by looking at the right
side of the accounting equation, either recorded as liabilities or shareholders’ equity.

The Organization of a Corporation
Incorporation is the process of forming a company into a corporate legal entity. The advantages of
incorporating are available to a corporation regardless of size, from a corporation with one shareholder to
those with hundreds of thousands of shareholders. To issue stock, an entity must first be incorporated in a
state.
The process of incorporating requires filing the appropriate paperwork and receiving approval from a
governmental entity to operate as a corporation. Each state has separate requirements for creating a
corporation, but ultimately, each state grants a corporation the right to conduct business in the respective
state in which the corporation is formed. The steps to incorporate are similar in most states:
1. The founders (incorporators) choose an available business name that complies with the state’s
corporation rules. A state will not allow a corporation to choose a name that is already in use or that has
been in use in recent years. Also, similar names might be disallowed.
2. The founders of a corporation prepare articles of incorporation called a “charter,” which defines the
basic structure and purpose of the corporation and the amount of capital stock that can be issued or sold.
3. The founders file the articles of incorporation with the Department of State of the state in which the
incorporation is desired. Once the articles are filed and any required fees are paid, the government
approves the incorporation.
4. The incorporators hold an organizational meeting to elect the board of directors. Board meetings must be
documented with formal board minutes (a written record of the items discussed, decisions made, and
action plans resulting from the meeting). The board of directors generally meets at least annually.
Microsoft, for example, has 14 directors on its board.

[1]

Boards may have more or fewer directors than

this, but most boards have a minimum of at least three directors.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

861

5. The board of directors prepares and adopts corporate bylaws. These bylaws lay out the operating rules
for the corporation. Templates for drawing up corporate bylaws are usually available from the state to
ensure that they conform with that state’s requirements.
6. The board of directors agrees upon a par value price for the stock. Par value is a legal concept discussed
later in this section. The price that the company receives (the initial market value) will be determined by
what the purchasing public is willing to pay. For example, the company might set the par value at $1 per
share, while the investing public on the day of issuance might be willing to pay $30 per share for the
stock.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Deciding Where to Incorporate
With 50 states to choose from, how do corporations decide where to incorporate? Many corporations are
formed in either Delaware or Nevada for several reasons. Delaware is especially advantageous for large
corporations because it has some of the most flexible business laws in the nation and its court system
has a division specifically for handling business cases that operates without juries. Additionally,
companies formed in Delaware that do not transact business in the state do not need to pay state
corporate income tax. Delaware imposes no personal tax for non-residents, and shareholders can be
non-residents. In addition, stock shares owned by non-Delaware residents are not subject to Delaware
state taxation.
Because of these advantages, Delaware dominated the share of business incorporation for several
decades. In recent years, though, other states are seeking to compete for these businesses by offering
similarly attractive benefits of incorporation. Nevada in particular has made headway. It has no state
corporate income tax and does not impose any fees on shares or shareholders. After the initial set up
fees, Nevada has no personal or franchise tax for corporations or their shareholders. Nevada, like
Delaware, does not require shareholders to be state residents. If a corporation chooses to incorporate in
Delaware, Nevada, or any state that is not its home state, it will need to register to do business in its
home state. Corporations that transact in states other than their state of incorporation are considered
foreign and may be subject to fees, local taxes, and annual reporting requirements that can be time
consuming and expensive.

Advantages of the Corporate Form
Compared to other forms of organization for businesses, corporations have several advantages. A corporation
is a separate legal entity, it provides limited liability for its owner or owners, ownership is transferable, it has a
continuing existence, and capital is generally easy to raise.

Separate Legal Entity
A sole proprietorship, a partnership, and a corporation are different types of business entities. However, only a

1

Microsoft Corporation. “Board of Directors.” https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/Investor/corporate-governance/board-of-directors.aspx

862

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

corporation is a legal entity. As a separate legal entity, a corporation can obtain funds by selling shares of
stock, it can incur debt, it can become a party to a contract, it can sue other parties, and it can be sued. The
owners are separate from the corporation. This separate legal status complies with one of the basic
accounting concepts—the accounting entity concept, which indicates that the economic activity of an entity
(the corporation) must be kept separate from the personal financial affairs of the owners.

Limited Liability
Many individuals seek to incorporate a business because they want the protection of limited liability. A
corporation usually limits the liability of an investor to the amount of his or her investment in the corporation.
For example, if a corporation enters into a loan agreement to borrow a sum of money and is unable to repay
the loan, the lender cannot recover the amount owed from the shareholders (owners) unless the owners
signed a personal guarantee. This is the opposite of partnerships and sole proprietorships. In partnerships
and sole proprietorships, the owners can be held responsible for any unpaid financial obligations of the
business and can be sued to pay obligations.

Transferable Ownership
Shareholders in a corporation can transfer shares to other parties without affecting the corporation’s
operations. In effect, the transfer takes place between the parties outside of the corporation. In most
corporations, the company generally does not have to give permission for shares to be transferred to another
party. No journal entry is recorded in the corporation’s accounting records when a shareholder sells his or her
stock to another shareholder. However, a memo entry must be made in the corporate stock ownership records
so any dividends can be issued to the correct shareholder.

Continuing Existence
From a legal perspective, a corporation is granted existence forever with no termination date. This legal aspect
falls in line with the basic accounting concept of the going concern assumption, which states that absent any
evidence to the contrary, a business will continue to operate in the indefinite future. Because ownership of
shares in a corporation is transferrable, re-incorporation is not necessary when ownership changes hands.
This differs from a partnership, which ends when a partner dies, or from a sole proprietorship, which ends
when the owner terminates the business.

Ease of Raising Capital
Because shares of stock can be easily transferred, corporations have a sizeable market of investors from
whom to obtain capital. More than 65 million American households

[2]

hold investments in the securities

markets. Compared to sole proprietorships (whose owners must obtain loans or invest their own funds) or to
partnerships (which must typically obtain funds from the existing partners or seek other partners to join;
although some partnerships are able borrow from outside parties), a corporation will find that capital is
relatively easy to raise.

2 Financial Samurai. “What Percent of Americans Hold Stocks?” February 18, 2019. https://www.financialsamurai.com/what-percent-ofamericans-own-stocks/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

863

Disadvantages of the Corporate Form
As compared to other organizations for businesses, there are also disadvantages to operating as a
corporation. They include the costs of organization, regulation, and taxation.

Costs of Organization
Corporations incur costs associated with organizing the corporate entity, which include attorney fees,
promotion costs, and filing fees paid to the state. These costs are debited to an account called organization
costs. Assume that on January 1, Rayco Corporation made a payment for $750 to its attorney to prepare the
incorporation documents and paid $450 to the state for filing fees. Rayco also incurred and paid $1,200 to
advertise and promote the stock offering. The total organization costs are $2,400 ($750 + $450 + $1,200). The
journal entry recorded by Rayco is a $2,400 debit to Organization Costs and a $2,400 credit to Cash.

Organization costs are reported as part of the operating expenses on the corporation’s income statement.

Regulation
Compared to partnerships and sole proprietorships, corporations are subject to considerably more regulation
both by the states in which they are incorporated and the states in which they operate. Each state provides
limits to the powers that a corporation may exercise and specifies the rights and liabilities of shareholders. The
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is a federal agency that regulates corporations whose shares are
listed and traded on security exchanges such as the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), the National Association
of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations Exchange (NASDAQ), and others; it accomplishes this through
required periodic filings and other regulations. States also require the filing of periodic reports and payment
of annual fees.

Taxation
As legal entities, typical corporations (C corporations, named after the specific subchapter of the Internal
Revenue Service code under which they are taxed), are subject to federal and state income taxes (in those
states with corporate taxes) based on the income they earn. Stockholders are also subject to income taxes,
both on the dividends they receive from corporations and any gains they realize when they dispose of their
stock. The income taxation of both the corporate entity’s income and the stockholder’s dividend is referred to
as double taxation because the income is taxed to the corporation that earned the income and then taxed
again to stockholders when they receive a distribution of the corporation’s income.
Corporations that are closely held (with fewer than 100 stockholders) can be classified as S corporations, so
named because they have elected to be taxed under subchapter S of the Internal Revenue Service code. For
the most part, S corporations pay no income taxes because the income of the corporation is divided among
and passed through to each of the stockholders, each of whom pays income taxes on his or her share. Both
Subchapter S (Sub S) and similar Limited Liability Companies (LLCs) are not taxed at the business entity but
instead pass their taxable income to their owners.

864

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Financing Options: Debt versus Equity
Before exploring the process for securing corporate financing through equity, it is important to review the
advantages and disadvantages of acquiring capital through debt. When deciding whether to raise capital by
issuing debt or equity, a corporation needs to consider dilution of ownership, repayment of debt, cash
obligations, budgeting impacts, administrative costs, and credit risks.

Dilution of Ownership
The most significant consideration of whether a company should seek funding using debt or equity financing
is the effect on the company’s financial position. Issuance of debt does not dilute the company’s ownership as
no additional ownership shares are issued. Issuing debt, or borrowing, creates an increase in cash, an asset,
and an increase in a liability, such as notes payable or bonds payable. Because borrowing is independent of an
owner’s ownership interest in the business, it has no effect on stockholders’ equity, and ownership of the
corporation remains the same as illustrated in the accounting equation in Figure 14.2.

Figure 14.2

Debt Financing. Debt financing increases assets and liabilities but has no effect on stockholders’

equity. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
On the other hand, when a corporation issues stock, it is financing with equity. The same increase in cash
occurs, but financing causes an increase in a capital stock account in stockholders’ equity as illustrated in the
accounting equation in Figure 14.3.

Figure 14.3

Equity Financing. Equity financing increases assets and stockholders’ equity but has no effect on

liabilities. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
This increase in stockholders’ equity implies that more shareholders will be allowed to vote and will participate
in the distribution of profits and assets upon liquidation.

Repayment of Debt
A second concern when choosing between debt and equity financing relates to the repayment to the lender. A
lender is a debt holder entitled to repayment of the original principal amount of the loan plus interest. Once
the debt is paid, the corporation has no additional obligation to the lender. This allows owners of a corporation
to claim a larger portion of the future earnings than would be possible if more stock were sold to investors. In
addition, the interest component of the debt is an expense, which reduces the amount of income on which a
company’s income tax liability is calculated, thereby lowering the corporation’s tax liability and the actual cost
of the loan to the company.

Cash Obligations
The most obvious difference between debt and equity financing is that with debt, the principal and interest
must be repaid, whereas with equity, there is no repayment requirement. The decision to declare dividends is

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

865

solely up to the board of directors, so if a company has limitations on cash, it can skip or defer the declaration
of dividends. When a company obtains capital through debt, it must have sufficient cash available to cover the
repayment. This can put pressure on the company to meet debt obligations when cash is needed for other
uses.

Budgeting
Except in the case of variable interest loans, loan and interest payments are easy to estimate for the purpose
of budgeting cash payments. Loan payments do not tend to be flexible; instead the principal payment is
required month after month. Moreover, interest costs incurred with debt are an additional fixed cost to the
company, which raises the company’s break-even point (total revenue equals total costs) as well as its cash
flow demands.

Cost Differences
Issuing debt rather than equity may reduce additional administration costs associated with having additional
shareholders. These costs may include the costs for informational mailings, processing and direct-depositing
dividend payments, and holding shareholder meetings. Issuing debt also saves the time associated with
shareholder controversies, which can often defer certain management actions until a shareholder vote can be
conducted.

Risk Assessment by Creditors
Borrowing commits the borrower to comply with debt covenants that can restrict both the financing options
and the opportunities that extend beyond the main business function. This can limit a company’s vision or
opportunities for change. For example, many debt covenants restrict a corporation’s debt-to-equity ratio,
which measures the portion of debt used by a company relative to the amount of stockholders’ equity,
calculated by dividing total debt by total equity.

When a company borrows additional funds, its total debt (the numerator) rises. Because there is no change in
total equity, the denominator remains the same, causing the debt-to-equity ratio to increase. Because an
increase in this ratio usually means that the company will have more difficulty in repaying the debt, lenders
and investors consider this an added risk. Accordingly, a business is limited in the amount of debt it can carry.
A debt agreement may also restrict the company from borrowing additional funds.
To increase the likelihood of debt repayment, a debt agreement often requires that a company’s assets serve
as collateral, or for the company’s owners to guarantee repayment. Increased risks to the company from highinterest debt and high amounts of debt, particularly when the economy is unstable, include obstacles to
growth and the potential for insolvency resulting from the costs of holding debt. These important
considerations should be assessed prior to determining whether a company should choose debt or equity
financing.

866

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

THINK IT THROUGH
Financing a Business Expansion
You are the CFO of a small corporation. The president, who is one of five shareholders, has created an
innovative new product that is testing well with substantial demand. To begin manufacturing, $400,000 is
needed to acquire the equipment. The corporation’s balance sheet shows total assets of $2,400,000 and
total liabilities of $600,000. Most of the liabilities relate to debt that carries a covenant requiring that the
company maintain a debt-to-equity ratio not exceeding 0.50 times. Determine the effect that each of the
two options of obtaining additional capital will have on the debt covenant. Prepare a brief memo
outlining the advantages of issuing shares of common stock.

How Stocks Work
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) (www.sec.gov) is a government agency that regulates large
and small public corporations. Its mission is “to protect investors, maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets,
and facilitate capital formation.”

[3]

The SEC identifies these as its five primary responsibilities:

• Inform and protect investors
• Facilitate capital information
• Enforce federal securities laws
• Regulate securities markets
• Provide data
Under the Securities Act of 1933,

[4]

all corporations that make their shares available for sale publicly in the

United States are expected to register with the SEC. The SEC’s registration requirement covers all
securities—not simply shares of stock—including most tradable financial instruments. The Securities Act of
1933, also known as the “truth in securities law,” aims to provide investors with the financial data they need to
make informed decisions. While some companies are exempt from filing documents with the SEC, those that
offer securities for sale in the U.S. and that are not exempt must file a number of forms along with financial
statements audited by certified public accountants.

Private versus Public Corporations
Both private and public corporations become incorporated in the same manner through the state
governmental agencies that handles incorporation. The journal entries and financial reporting are the same
whether a company is a public or a private corporation. A private corporation is usually owned by a relatively
small number of investors. Its shares are not publicly traded, and the ownership of the stock is restricted to
only those allowed by the board of directors.
The SEC defines a publicly traded company as a company that “discloses certain business and financial
information regularly to the public” and whose “securities trade on public markets.”

[5]

A company can initially

3 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “What We Do.” June 10, 2013. https://www.sec.gov/Article/whatwedo.html
4 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “Registration under the Securities Act of 1933.” https://www.investor.gov/additional-resources/
general-resources/glossary/registration-under-securities-act-1933

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

867

operate as private and later decide to “go public,” while other companies go public at the point of
incorporation. The process of going public refers to a company undertaking an initial public offering (IPO) by
issuing shares of its stock to the public for the first time. After its IPO, the corporation becomes subject to
public reporting requirements and its shares are frequently listed on a stock exchange.

[6]

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Spreading the Risk
The East India Company became the world’s first publicly traded company as the result of a single
factor—risk. During the 1600s, single companies felt it was too risky to sail from the European mainland
to the East Indies. These islands held vast resources and trade opportunities, enticing explorers to cross
the Atlantic Ocean in search of fortunes. In 1600, several shipping companies joined forces and formed
“Governor and Company of Merchants of London trading with the East Indies,” which was referred to as
the East India Company. This arrangement allowed the shipping companies—the investors—to purchase
shares in multiple companies rather than investing in a single voyage. If a single ship out of a fleet was
lost at sea, investors could still generate a profit from ships that successfully completely their voyages.

[7]

The Secondary Market
A corporation’s shares continue to be bought and sold by the public after the initial public offering. Investors
interested in purchasing shares of a corporation’s stock have several options. One option is to buy stock on
the secondary market, an organized market where previously issued stocks and bonds can be traded after
they are issued. Many investors purchase through stock exchanges like the New York Stock Exchange or
NASDAQ using a brokerage firm. A full-service brokerage firm provides investment advice as well as a variety
of financial planning services, whereas a discount brokerage offers a reduced commission and often does not
provide investment advice. Most of the stock trading—buying and selling of shares by investors—takes place
through brokers, registered members of the stock exchange who buy and sell stock on behalf of others.
Online access to trading has broadened the secondary market significantly over the past few decades.
Alternatively, stocks can be purchased from investment bankers, who provide advice to companies wishing
to issue new stock, purchase the stock from the company issuing the stock, and then resell the securities to
the public.

[8]

Marketing a Company’s Stock
Once a corporation has completed the incorporation process, it can issue stock. Each share of stock sold
entitles the shareholder (the investor) to a percentage of ownership in the company. Private corporations are

5 U. S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “Public Companies.” https://www.investor.gov/introduction-investing/basics/how-marketworks/public-companies
6 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. “Companies, Going Public.” October 14, 2014. https://www.sec.gov/fast-answers/answerscomppublichtm.html
7 Johnson Hur. “History of The Stock Market.” BeBusinessed.com. October 2016. https://bebusinessed.com/history/history-of-the-stockmarket/
8 Dr. Econ. “Why Do Investment Banks Syndicate a New Securities Issue (and Related Questions).” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
December 1999. https://www.frbsf.org/education/publications/doctor-econ/1999/december/investment-bank-securities-retirement-insurance/

868

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

usually owned by a small number of investors and are not traded on a public exchange. Regardless of whether
the corporation is public or private, the steps to finding investors are similar:
1. Have a trusted and reliable management team. These should be experienced professionals who can
guide the corporation.
2. Have a financial reporting system in place. Accurate financial reporting is key to providing potential
investors with reliable information.
3. Choose an investment banker to provide advice and to assist in raising capital. Investment bankers are
individuals who work in a financial institution that is primarily in the business of raising capital for
corporations.
4. Write the company’s story. This adds personality to the corporation. What is the mission, why it will be
successful, and what sets the corporation apart?
5. Approach potential investors. Selecting the right investment bankers will be extremely helpful with this
step.

Capital Stock
A company’s corporate charter specifies the classes of shares and the number of shares of each class that a
company can issue. There are two classes of capital stock—common stock and preferred stock. The two
classes of stock enable a company to attract capital from investors with different risk preferences. Both classes
of stock can be sold by either public or non-public companies; however, if a company issues only one class, it
must be common stock. Companies report both common and preferred stock in the stockholders’ equity
section of the balance sheet.

Common Stock
A company’s primary class of stock issued is common stock, and each share represents a partial claim to
ownership or a share of the company’s business. For many companies, this is the only class of stock they have
authorized. Common stockholders have four basic rights.
1. Common stockholders have the right to vote on corporate matters, including the selection of corporate
directors and other issues requiring the approval of owners. Each share of stock owned by an investor
generally grants the investor one vote.
2. Common stockholders have the right to share in corporate net income proportionally through dividends.
3. If the corporation should have to liquidate, common stockholders have the right to share in any
distribution of assets after all creditors and any preferred stockholders have been paid.
4. In some jurisdictions, common shareholders have a preemptive right, which allows shareholders the
option to maintain their ownership percentage when new shares of stock are issued by the company. For
example, suppose a company has 1,000 shares of stock issued and plans to issue 200 more shares. A
shareholder who currently owns 50 shares will be given the right to buy a percentage of the new issue
equal to his current percentage of ownership. His current percentage of ownership is 5%:

Original ownership percentage = 50 = 5%
1,000

This shareholder will be given the right to buy 5% of the new issue, or 10 new shares.

Number of new shares to be purchased = 5% × 200 shares = 10 shares
Should the shareholder choose not to buy the shares, the company can offer the shares to other investors. The

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

869

purpose of the preemptive right is to prevent new issuances of stock from reducing the ownership percentage
of the current shareholders. If the shareholder in our example is not offered the opportunity to buy 5% of the
additional shares (his current ownership percentage) and the new shares are sold to other investors, the
shareholder’s ownership percentage will drop because the total shares issued will increase.

Total number of issued shares after the new issue = 1,000 + 200 = 1,200 shares
New ownership percentage = 50 = 4.17%
1,200
The shareholder would now own only 4.17% of the corporation, compared to the previous 5%.

Preferred Stock
A company’s charter may authorize more than one class of stock. Preferred stock has unique rights that are
“preferred,” or more advantageous, to shareholders than common stock. The classification of preferred stock
is often a controversial area in accounting as some researchers believe preferred stock has characteristics
closer to that of a stock/bond hybrid security, with characteristics of debt rather than a true equity item. For
example, unlike common stockholders, preferred shareholders typically do not have voting rights; in this way,
they are similar to bondholders. In addition, preferred shares do not share in the common stock dividend
distributions. Instead, the “preferred” classification entitles shareholders to a dividend that is fixed (assuming
sufficient dividends are declared), similar to the fixed interest rate associated with bonds and other debt items.
Preferred stock also mimics debt in that preferred shareholders have a priority of dividend payments over
common stockholders. While there may be characteristics of both debt and equity, preferred stock is still
reported as part of stockholders’ equity on the balance sheet.
Not every corporation authorizes and issues preferred stock, and there are some important characteristics
that corporations should consider when deciding to issue preferred stock. The price of preferred stock typically
has less volatility in the stock market. This makes it easier for companies to more reliably budget the amount
of the expected capital contribution since the share price is not expected to fluctuate as freely as for common
stock. For the investor, this means there is less chance of large gains or losses on the sale of preferred stock.

The Status of Shares of Stock
The corporate charter specifies the number of authorized shares, which is the maximum number of shares
that a corporation can issue to its investors as approved by the state in which the company is incorporated.
Once shares are sold to investors, they are considered issued shares. Shares that are issued and are currently
held by investors are called outstanding shares because they are “out” in the hands of investors.
Occasionally, a company repurchases shares from investors. While these shares are still issued, they are no
longer considered to be outstanding. These repurchased shares are called treasury stock.
Assume that Waystar Corporation has 2,000 shares of capital stock authorized in its corporate charter. During
May, Waystar issues 1,500 of these shares to investors. These investors are now called stockholders because
they “hold” shares of stock. Because the other 500 authorized shares have not been issued they are
considered unissued shares. Now assume that Waystar buys back 100 shares of stock from the investors who
own the 1,500 shares. Only 1,400 of the issued shares are considered outstanding, because 100 shares are now
held by the company as treasury shares.

870

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Stock Values
Two of the most important values associated with stock are market value and par value. The market value of
stock is the price at which the stock of a public company trades on the stock market. This amount does not
appear in the corporation’s accounting records, nor in the company’s financial statements.
Most corporate charters specify the par value assigned to each share of stock. This value is printed on the
stock certificates and is often referred to as a face value because it is printed on the “face” of the certificate.
Incorporators typically set the par value at a very small arbitrary amount because it is used internally for
accounting purposes and has no economic significance. Because par value often has some legal significance, it
is considered to be legal capital. In some states, par value is the minimum price at which the stock can be sold.
If for some reason a share of stock with a par value of one dollar was issued for less than its par value of one
dollar known as issuing at a stock discount, the shareholder could be held liable for the difference between
the issue price and the par value if liquidation occurs and any creditors remain unpaid.
Under some state laws, corporations are sometimes allowed to issue no-par stock—a stock with no par value
assigned. When this occurs, the company’s board of directors typically assigns a stated value to each share of
stock, which serves as the company’s legal capital. Companies generally account for stated value in the
accounting records in the same manner as par value. If the company’s board fails to assign a stated value to
no-par stock, the entire proceeds of the stock sale are treated as legal capital. A portion of the stockholders’
equity section of Frontier Communications Corporation’s balance sheet as of December 31, 2017 displays the
reported preferred and common stock. The par value of the preferred stock is $0.01 per share and $0.25 per
share for common stock. The legal capital of the preferred stock is $192.50, while the legal capital of the
common stock is $19,883.

[9]

9 Frontier Communications Corporation. 10-K Filing. February 28, 2018. https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/20520/
000002052018000007/ftr-20171231x10k.htm#Exhibits_and_Financial_Statement_Schedul

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

871

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Shareholders, Stakeholders, and the Business Judgment Rule
Shareholders are the owners of a corporation, whereas stakeholders have an interest in the outcome of
decisions of the corporation. Courts have ruled that, “A business corporation is organized and carried on
primarily for the profit of the stockholders” as initially ruled in the early case Dodge v. Ford Motor Co., 204
Mich. 459, 170 N.W. 668 (Mich. 1919). This early case outlined the “business judgment rule.” It allows for
a corporation to use its judgment in how to run the company in the best interests of the shareholders,
but also allows the corporation the ability to make decisions for the benefit of the company’s
stakeholders. The term known as the “business judgment rule” has been expanded in numerous cases
to include making decisions directly for the benefit of stakeholders, thereby allowing management to run
a company in a prudent fashion. The stakeholder theories started in the Dodge case have been expended
to allow corporations to make decisions for the corporation’s benefit, including decisions that support
stakeholder rights.
Prudent management of a corporation includes making decisions that support stakeholders and
shareholders. A shareholder is also a stakeholder in any decision. A stakeholder is anyone with an
interest in the outcome in the corporation’s decision, even if the person owns no financial interest in the
corporation. Corporations need to take a proactive step in managing stakeholder concerns and issues.
Strategies on how to manage stakeholder needs have been developed from both a moral perspective
and a risk management perspective. Both approaches allow management to understand the issues
related to their stakeholders and to make decisions in the best interest of the corporation and its owners.
Proper stakeholder management should allow corporations to develop profitable long-term plans that
lead to greater viability of the corporation.

14.2

Analyze and Record Transactions for the Issuance and Repurchase of

Stock
Chad and Rick have successfully incorporated La Cantina and are ready to issue common stock to themselves
and the newly recruited investors. The proceeds will be used to open new locations. The corporate charter of
the corporation indicates that the par value of its common stock is $1.50 per share. When stock is sold to
investors, it is very rarely sold at par value. Most often, shares are issued at a value in excess of par. This is
referred to as issuing stock at a premium. Stock with no par value that has been assigned a stated value is
treated very similarly to stock with a par value.
Stock can be issued in exchange for cash, property, or services provided to the corporation. For example, an
investor could give a delivery truck in exchange for a company’s stock. Another investor could provide legal
fees in exchange for stock. The general rule is to recognize the assets received in exchange for stock at the
asset’s fair market value.

872

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Typical Common Stock Transactions
The company plans to issue most of the shares in exchange for cash, and other shares in exchange for kitchen
equipment provided to the corporation by one of the new investors. Two common accounts in the equity
section of the balance sheet are used when issuing stock—Common Stock and Additional Paid-in Capital from
Common Stock. Common Stock consists of the par value of all shares of common stock issued. Additional
paid-in capital from common stock consists of the excess of the proceeds received from the issuance of the
stock over the stock’s par value. When a company has more than one class of stock, it usually keeps a separate
additional paid-in capital account for each class.

Issuing Common Stock with a Par Value in Exchange for Cash
When a company issues new stock for cash, assets increase with a debit, and equity accounts increase with a
credit. To illustrate, assume that La Cantina issues 8,000 shares of common stock to investors on January 1 for
cash, with the investors paying cash of $21.50 per share. The total cash to be received is $172,000.

8,000 shares × $21.50 = $172,000
The transaction causes Cash to increase (debit) for the total cash received. The Common Stock account
increases (credit) with a credit for the par value of the 8,000 shares issued: 8,000 × $1.50, or $12,000. The
excess received over the par value is reported in the Additional Paid-in Capital from Common Stock account.
Since the shares were issued for $21.50 per share, the excess over par value per share of $20 ($21.50 − $1.50) is
multiplied by the number of shares issued to arrive at the Additional Paid-in Capital from Common Stock
credit.

($21.50 − $1.50) × 8,000 = $160,000

Issuing Common Stock with a Par Value in Exchange for Property or Services
When a company issues stock for property or services, the company increases the respective asset account
with a debit and the respective equity accounts with credits. The asset received in the exchange—such as land,
equipment, inventory, or any services provided to the corporation such as legal or accounting services—is
recorded at the fair market value of the stock or the asset or services received, whichever is more clearly
determinable.
To illustrate, assume that La Cantina issues 2,000 shares of authorized common stock in exchange for legal
services provided by an attorney. The legal services have a value of $8,000 based on the amount the attorney
would charge. Because La Cantina’s stock is not actively traded, the asset will be valued at the more easily
determinable market value of the legal services. La Cantina must recognize the market value of the legal
services as an increase (debit) of $8,000 to its Legal Services Expense account. Similar to recording the stock
issued for cash, the Common Stock account is increased by the par value of the issued stock, $1.50 × 2,000
shares, or $3,000. The excess of the value of the legal services over the par value of the stock appears as an

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

873

increase (credit) to the Additional Paid-in Capital from Common Stock account:

$8,000 − $3,000 = $5,000

Just after the issuance of both investments, the stockholders’ equity account, Common Stock, reflects the total
par value of the issued stock; in this case, $3,000 + $12,000, or a total of $15,000. The amounts received in
excess of the par value are accumulated in the Additional Paid-in Capital from Common Stock account in the
amount of $5,000 + $160,000, or $165,000. A portion of the equity section of the balance sheet just after the
two stock issuances by La Cantina will reflect the Common Stock account stock issuances as shown in
Figure 14.4.

Figure 14.4

Partial Stockholder’s Equity for La Cantina. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Issuing No-Par Common Stock with a Stated Value
Not all stock has a par value specified in the company’s charter. In most cases, no-par stock is assigned a
stated value by the board of directors, which then becomes the legal capital value. Stock with a stated value is
treated as if the stated value is a par value. Assume that La Cantina’s 8,000 shares of common stock issued on
June 1 for $21.50 were issued at a stated value of $1.50 rather than at a par value. The total cash to be received
remains $172,000 (8,000 shares × $21.50), which is recorded as an increase (debit) to Cash. The Common Stock
account increases with a credit for the stated value of the 8,000 shares issued: 8,000 × $1.50, or $12,000. The
excess received over the stated value is reported in the Additional Paid-in Capital from Common Stock account
at $160,000, based on the issue price of $21.50 per share less the stated value of $1.50, or $20, times the 8,000
shares issued:
⎛
⎝

$21.50 − $1.50⎞⎠ × 8,000 = $160,000

The transaction looks identical except for the explanation.

874

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

If the 8,000 shares of La Cantina’s common stock had been no-par, and no stated value had been assigned, the
$172,000 would be debited to Cash, with a corresponding increase in the Common Stock account as a credit of
$172,000. No entry would be made to Additional Paid-in Capital account as it is reserved for stock issue
amounts above par or stated value. The entry would appear as:

Issuing Preferred Stock
A few months later, Chad and Rick need additional capital to develop a website to add an online presence and
decide to issue all 1,000 of the company’s authorized preferred shares. The 5%, $8 par value, preferred shares
are sold at $45 each. The Cash account increases with a debit for $45 times 1,000 shares, or $45,000. The
Preferred Stock account increases for the par value of the preferred stock, $8 times 1,000 shares, or $8,000.
The excess of the issue price of $45 per share over the $8 par value, times the 1,000 shares, is credited as an
increase to Additional Paid-in Capital from Preferred Stock, resulting in a credit of $37,000.

($45 − $8) × 1,000 = $37,000
The journal entry is:

Figure 14.5 shows what the equity section of the balance sheet will reflect after the preferred stock is issued.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Figure 14.5

875

Partial Stockholders’ Equity for La Cantina. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,

under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Notice that the corporation presents preferred stock before common stock in the Stockholders’ Equity section
of the balance sheet because preferred stock has preference over common stock in the case of liquidation.
GAAP requires that each class of stock displayed in this section of the balance sheet includes several items that
must be disclosed along with the respective account names. The required items to be disclosed are:
• Par or stated value
• Number of shares authorized
• Number of shares issued
• Number of shares outstanding
• If preferred stock, the dividend rate

Treasury Stock
Sometimes a corporation decides to purchase its own stock in the market. These shares are referred to as
treasury stock. A company might purchase its own outstanding stock for a number of possible reasons. It can
be a strategic maneuver to prevent another company from acquiring a majority interest or preventing a
hostile takeover. A purchase can also create demand for the stock, which in turn raises the market price of the
stock. Sometimes companies buy back shares to be used for employee stock options or profit-sharing plans.

THINK IT THROUGH
Walt Disney Buys Back Stock
The Walt Disney Company has consistently spent a large portion of its cash flows in buying back its own
stock. According to The Motley Fool, the Walt Disney Company bought back 74 million shares in 2016
alone. Read the Motley Fool article (https://openstax.org/l/50DisneyShares) and comment on other
options that Walt Disney may have had to obtain financing.

876

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Acquiring Treasury Stock
When a company purchases treasury stock, it is reflected on the balance sheet in a contra equity account. As a
contra equity account, Treasury Stock has a debit balance, rather than the normal credit balances of other
equity accounts. The total cost of treasury stock reduces total equity. In substance, treasury stock implies that
a company owns shares of itself. However, owning a portion of one’s self is not possible. Treasury shares do
not carry the basic common shareholder rights because they are not outstanding. Dividends are not paid on
treasury shares, they provide no voting rights, and they do not receive a share of assets upon liquidation of the
company. There are two methods possible to account for treasury stock—the cost method, which is discussed
here, and the par value method, which is a more advanced accounting topic. The cost method is so named
because the amount in the Treasury Stock account at any point in time represents the number of shares held
in treasury times the original cost paid to acquire each treasury share.
Assume Duratech’s net income for the first year was $3,100,000, and that the company has 12,500 shares of
common stock issued. During May, the company’s board of directors authorizes the repurchase of 800 shares
of the company’s own common stock as treasury stock. Each share of the company’s common stock is selling
for $25 on the open market on May 1, the date that Duratech purchases the stock. Duratech will pay the
market price of the stock at $25 per share times the 800 shares it purchased, for a total cost of $20,000. The
following journal entry is recorded for the purchase of the treasury stock under the cost method.

Even though the company is purchasing stock, there is no asset recognized for the purchase. An entity cannot
own part of itself, so no asset is acquired. Immediately after the purchase, the equity section of the balance
sheet (Figure 14.6) will show the total cost of the treasury shares as a deduction from total stockholders’
equity.

Figure 14.6

Partial Stockholders’ Equity Section of the Balance Sheet for Duratech. After the purchase of

treasury stock, the stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet is shown as a deduction from total
stockholders’ equity. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

877

Notice on the partial balance sheet that the number of common shares outstanding changes when treasury
stock transactions occur. Initially, the company had 10,000 common shares issued and outstanding. The 800
repurchased shares are no longer outstanding, reducing the total outstanding to 9,200 shares.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Reporting Treasury Stock for Nestlé Holdings Group
Nestlé Holdings Group sells a number of major brands of food and beverages including Gerber, Häagen-Dazs,
Purina, and Lean Cuisine. The company’s statement of stockholders’ equity shows that it began with 990
million Swiss francs (CHF) in treasury stock at the beginning of 2016. In 2017, it acquired additional shares at a
cost of 3,547 million CHF, raising its total treasury stock to 4,537 million CHF at the end of 2017, primarily due
to a share buy-back program.

[10]

Reissuing Treasury Stock above Cost
Management typically does not hold treasury stock forever. The company can resell the treasury stock at cost,
above cost, below cost, or retire it. If La Cantina reissues 100 of its treasury shares at cost ($25 per share) on
July 3, a reversal of the original purchase for the 100 shares is recorded. This has the effect of increasing an
asset, Cash, with a debit, and decreasing the Treasury Stock account with a credit. The original cost paid for
each treasury share, $25, is multiplied by the 100 shares to be resold, or $2,500. The journal entry to record this
sale of the treasury shares at cost is:

If the treasury stock is resold at a price higher than its original purchase price, the company debits the Cash
account for the amount of cash proceeds, reduces the Treasury Stock account with a credit for the cost of the

10

Nestlé. “Annual Report 2017.” 2017. https://www.nestle.com/investors/annual-report

878

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

treasury shares being sold, and credits the Paid-in Capital from Treasury Stock account for the difference. Even
though the difference—the selling price less the cost—looks like a gain, it is treated as additional capital
because gains and losses only result from the disposition of economic resources (assets). Treasury Stock is not
an asset. Assume that on August 1, La Cantina sells another 100 shares of its treasury stock, but this time the
selling price is $28 per share. The Cash Account is increased by the selling price, $28 per share times the
number of shares resold, 100, for a total debit to Cash of $2,800. The Treasury Stock account decreases by the
cost of the 100 shares sold, 100 × $25 per share, for a total credit of $2,500, just as it did in the sale at cost. The
difference is recorded as a credit of $300 to Additional Paid-in Capital from Treasury Stock.

Reissuing Treasury Stock Below Cost
If the treasury stock is reissued at a price below cost, the account used for the difference between the cash
received from the resale and the original cost of the treasury stock depends on the balance in the Paid-in
Capital from Treasury Stock account. Any balance that exists in this account will be a credit. The transaction will
require a debit to the Paid-in Capital from Treasury Stock account to the extent of the balance. If the
transaction requires a debit greater than the balance in the Paid-in Capital account, any additional difference
between the cost of the treasury stock and its selling price is recorded as a reduction of the Retained Earnings
account as a debit. If there is no balance in the Additional Paid-in Capital from Treasury Stock account, the
entire debit will reduce retained earnings.
Assume that on October 9, La Cantina sells another 100 shares of its treasury stock, but this time at $23 per
share. Cash is increased for the selling price, $23 per share times the number of shares resold, 100, for a total
debit to Cash of $2,300. The Treasury Stock account decreases by the cost of the 100 shares sold, 100 × $25 per
share, for a total credit of $2,500. The difference is recorded as a debit of $200 to the Additional Paid-in Capital
from Treasury Stock account. Notice that the balance in this account from the August 1 transaction was $300,
which was sufficient to offset the $200 debit. The transaction is recorded as:

Treasury stock transactions have no effect on the number of shares authorized or issued. Because shares held
in treasury are not outstanding, each treasury stock transaction will impact the number of shares outstanding.
A corporation may also purchase its own stock and retire it. Retired stock reduces the number of shares
issued. When stock is repurchased for retirement, the stock must be removed from the accounts so that it is
not reported on the balance sheet. The balance sheet will appear as if the stock was never issued in the first
place.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

879

YOUR TURN
Understanding Stockholders’ Equity
Wilson Enterprises reports the following stockholders’ equity:

Figure 14.7

Wilson Enterprises, Inc., Stockholders’ Equity Section of the Balance Sheet, For the Month

Ended December 31, 2020. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
license)
Based on the partial balance sheet presented, answer the following questions:
A. At what price was each share of treasury stock purchased?
B. What is reflected in the additional paid-in capital account?
C. Why is there a difference between the common stock shares issued and the shares outstanding?
Solution
A. $240,000 ÷ 20,000 = $12 per share. B. The difference between the market price and the par value when
the stock was issued. C. Treasury stock.

14.3

Record Transactions and the Effects on Financial Statements for Cash

Dividends, Property Dividends, Stock Dividends, and Stock Splits
Do you remember playing the board game Monopoly when you were younger? If you landed on the Chance
space, you picked a card. The Chance card may have paid a $50 dividend. At the time, you probably were just
excited for the additional funds.

880

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Figure 14.8

Chance Card. A Chance card from a Monopoly game indicates that the bank pays you a dividend

of $50. (credit: modification of “Monopoly Chance Card” by Kerry Ceszyk/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)
For corporations, there are several reasons to consider sharing some of their earnings with investors in the
form of dividends. Many investors view a dividend payment as a sign of a company’s financial health and are
more likely to purchase its stock. In addition, corporations use dividends as a marketing tool to remind
investors that their stock is a profit generator.
This section explains the three types of dividends—cash dividends, property dividends, and stock
dividends—along with stock splits, showing the journal entries involved and the reason why companies
declare and pay dividends.

The Nature and Purposes of Dividends
Stock investors are typically driven by two factors—a desire to earn income in the form of dividends and a
desire to benefit from the growth in the value of their investment. Members of a corporation’s board of
directors understand the need to provide investors with a periodic return, and as a result, often declare
dividends up to four times per year. However, companies can declare dividends whenever they want and are
not limited in the number of annual declarations. Dividends are a distribution of a corporation’s earnings.
They are not considered expenses, and they are not reported on the income statement. They are a distribution
of the net income of a company and are not a cost of business operations.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
So Many Dividends
The declaration and payment of dividends varies among companies. In December 2017 alone, 4,506 U.S.
companies declared either cash, stock, or property dividends—the largest number of declarations since
2004.

[11]

It is likely that these companies waited to declare dividends until after financial statements were

prepared, so that the board and other executives involved in the process were able to provide estimates
of the 2017 earnings.

Some companies choose not to pay dividends and instead reinvest all of their earnings back into the company.
One common scenario for situation occurs when a company experiencing rapid growth. The company may

11 Ironman at Political Calculations. “Dividends by the Numbers through January 2018.” Seeking Alpha. February 9, 2018.
https://seekingalpha.com/article/4145079-dividends-numbers-january-2018

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

881

want to invest all their retained earnings to support and continue that growth. Another scenario is a mature
business that believes retaining its earnings is more likely to result in an increased market value and stock
price. In other instances, a business may want to use its earnings to purchase new assets or branch out into
new areas. Most companies attempt dividend smoothing, the practice of paying dividends that are relatively
equal period after period, even when earnings fluctuate. In exceptional circumstances, some corporations pay
a special dividend, which is a one-time extra distribution of corporate earnings. A special dividend usually
stems from a period of extraordinary earnings or a special transaction, such as the sale of a division. Some
companies, such as Costco Wholesale Corporation, pay recurring dividends and periodically offer a special
dividend. While Costco’s regular quarterly dividend is $0.57 per share, the company issued a $7.00 per share
cash dividend in 2017.

[12]

Companies that have both common and preferred stock must consider the

characteristics of each class of stock.
Note that dividends are distributed or paid only to shares of stock that are outstanding. Treasury shares are
not outstanding, so no dividends are declared or distributed for these shares. Regardless of the type of
dividend, the declaration always causes a decrease in the retained earnings account.

Dividend Dates
A company’s board of directors has the power to formally vote to declare dividends. The date of declaration
is the date on which the dividends become a legal liability, the date on which the board of directors votes to
distribute the dividends. Cash and property dividends become liabilities on the declaration date because they
represent a formal obligation to distribute economic resources (assets) to stockholders. On the other hand,
stock dividends distribute additional shares of stock, and because stock is part of equity and not an asset,
stock dividends do not become liabilities when declared.
At the time dividends are declared, the board establishes a date of record and a date of payment. The date of
record establishes who is entitled to receive a dividend; stockholders who own stock on the date of record are
entitled to receive a dividend even if they sell it prior to the date of payment. Investors who purchase shares
after the date of record but before the payment date are not entitled to receive dividends since they did not
own the stock on the date of record. These shares are said to be sold ex dividend. The date of payment is the
date that payment is issued to the investor for the amount of the dividend declared.

Cash Dividends
Cash dividends are corporate earnings that companies pass along to their shareholders. To pay a cash
dividend, the corporation must meet two criteria. First, there must be sufficient cash on hand to fulfill the
dividend payment. Second, the company must have sufficient retained earnings; that is, it must have enough
residual assets to cover the dividend such that the Retained Earnings account does not become a negative
(debit) amount upon declaration. On the day the board of directors votes to declare a cash dividend, a journal
entry is required to record the declaration as a liability.

Accounting for Cash Dividends When Only Common Stock Is Issued
Small private companies like La Cantina often have only one class of stock issued, common stock. Assume that

12 Jing Pan. “Will Costco Wholesale Corporation Pay a Special Dividend in 2018?” Income Investors. May 9, 2018.
https://www.incomeinvestors.com/will-costco-wholesale-corporation-pay-special-dividend-2018/38865/

882

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

on December 16, La Cantina’s board of directors declares a $0.50 per share dividend on common stock. As of
the date of declaration, the company has 10,000 shares of common stock issued and holds 800 shares as
treasury stock. The total cash dividend to be paid is based on the number of shares outstanding, which is the
total shares issued less those in treasury. Outstanding shares are 10,000 – 800, or 9,200 shares. The cash
dividend is:

9,200 shares × $0.50 = $4,600
The journal entry to record the declaration of the cash dividends involves a decrease (debit) to Retained
Earnings (a stockholders’ equity account) and an increase (credit) to Cash Dividends Payable (a liability
account).

While a few companies may use a temporary account, Dividends Declared, rather than Retained Earnings,
most companies debit Retained Earnings directly. Ultimately, any dividends declared cause a decrease to
Retained Earnings.
The second significant dividend date is the date of record. The date of record determines which shareholders
will receive the dividends. There is no journal entry recorded; the company creates a list of the stockholders
that will receive dividends.
The date of payment is the third important date related to dividends. This is the date that dividend payments
are prepared and sent to shareholders who owned stock on the date of record. The related journal entry is a
fulfillment of the obligation established on the declaration date; it reduces the Cash Dividends Payable account
(with a debit) and the Cash account (with a credit).

Property Dividends
A property dividend occurs when a company declares and distributes assets other than cash. The dividend
typically involves either the distribution of shares of another company that the issuing corporation owns (one
of its assets) or a distribution of inventory. For example, Walt Disney Company may choose to distribute tickets
to visit its theme parks. Anheuser-Busch InBev, the company that owns the Budweiser and Michelob brands,
may choose to distribute a case of beer to each shareholder. A property dividend may be declared when a
company wants to reward its investors but doesn’t have the cash to distribute, or if it needs to hold onto its
existing cash for other investments. Property dividends are not as common as cash or stock dividends. They
are recorded at the fair market value of the asset being distributed. To illustrate accounting for a property
dividend, assume that Duratech Corporation has 60,000 shares of $0.50 par value common stock outstanding

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

883

at the end of its second year of operations, and the company’s board of directors declares a property dividend
consisting of a package of soft drinks that it produces to each holder of common stock. The retail value of each
case is $3.50. The amount of the dividend is calculated by multiplying the number of shares by the market
value of each package:

60,000 shares × $3.50 = $210,000
The declaration to record the property dividend is a decrease (debit) to Retained Earnings for the value of the
dividend and an increase (credit) to Property Dividends Payable for the $210,000.

The journal entry to distribute the soft drinks on January 14 decreases both the Property Dividends Payable
account (debit) and the Cash account (credit).

Comparing Small Stock Dividends, Large Stock Dividends, and Stock Splits
Companies that do not want to issue cash or property dividends but still want to provide some benefit to
shareholders may choose between small stock dividends, large stock dividends, and stock splits. Both small
and large stock dividends occur when a company distributes additional shares of stock to existing
stockholders.
There is no change in total assets, total liabilities, or total stockholders’ equity when a small stock dividend, a
large stock dividend, or a stock split occurs. Both types of stock dividends impact the accounts in stockholders’
equity. A stock split causes no change in any of the accounts within stockholders’ equity. The impact on the
financial statement usually does not drive the decision to choose between one of the stock dividend types or a
stock split. Instead, the decision is typically based on its effect on the market. Large stock dividends and stock
splits are done in an attempt to lower the market price of the stock so that it is more affordable to potential
investors. A small stock dividend is viewed by investors as a distribution of the company’s earnings. Both small
and large stock dividends cause an increase in common stock and a decrease to retained earnings. This is a
method of capitalizing (increasing stock) a portion of the company’s earnings (retained earnings).

Stock Dividends
Some companies issue shares of stock as a dividend rather than cash or property. This often occurs when the
company has insufficient cash but wants to keep its investors happy. When a company issues a stock
dividend, it distributes additional shares of stock to existing shareholders. These shareholders do not have to
pay income taxes on stock dividends when they receive them; instead, they are taxed when the investor sells
them in the future.

884

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

A stock dividend distributes shares so that after the distribution, all stockholders have the exact same
percentage of ownership that they held prior to the dividend. There are two types of stock dividends—small
stock dividends and large stock dividends. The key difference is that small dividends are recorded at market
value and large dividends are recorded at the stated or par value.

Small Stock Dividends
A small stock dividend occurs when a stock dividend distribution is less than 25% of the total outstanding
shares based on the shares outstanding prior to the dividend distribution. To illustrate, assume that Duratech
Corporation has 60,000 shares of $0.50 par value common stock outstanding at the end of its second year of
operations. Duratech’s board of directors declares a 5% stock dividend on the last day of the year, and the
market value of each share of stock on the same day was $9. Figure 14.9 shows the stockholders’ equity
section of Duratech’s balance sheet just prior to the stock declaration.

Figure 14.9

Stockholders’ Equity for Duratech. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC

BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The 5% common stock dividend will require the distribution of 60,000 shares times 5%, or 3,000 additional
shares of stock. An investor who owns 100 shares will receive 5 shares in the dividend distribution (5% × 100
shares). The journal entry to record the stock dividend declaration requires a decrease (debit) to Retained
Earnings for the market value of the shares to be distributed: 3,000 shares × $9, or $27,000. An increase (credit)
to the Common Stock Dividends Distributable is recorded for the par value of the stock to be distributed: 3,000
× $0.50, or $1,500. The excess of the market value over the par value is reported as an increase (credit) to the
Additional Paid-in Capital from Common Stock account in the amount of $25,500.

If the company prepares a balance sheet prior to distributing the stock dividend, the Common Stock Dividend
Distributable account is reported in the equity section of the balance sheet beneath the Common Stock
account. The journal entry to record the stock dividend distribution requires a decrease (debit) to Common
Stock Dividend Distributable to remove the distributable amount from that account, $1,500, and an increase
(credit) to Common Stock for the same par value amount.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

885

To see the effects on the balance sheet, it is helpful to compare the stockholders’ equity section of the balance
sheet before and after the small stock dividend.

After the distribution, the total stockholders’ equity remains the same as it was prior to the distribution. The
amounts within the accounts are merely shifted from the earned capital account (Retained Earnings) to the
contributed capital accounts (Common Stock and Additional Paid-in Capital). However, the number of shares
outstanding has changed. Prior to the distribution, the company had 60,000 shares outstanding. Just after the
distribution, there are 63,000 outstanding. The difference is the 3,000 additional shares of the stock dividend
distribution. The company still has the same total value of assets, so its value does not change at the time a
stock distribution occurs. The increase in the number of outstanding shares does not dilute the value of the
shares held by the existing shareholders. The market value of the original shares plus the newly issued shares
is the same as the market value of the original shares before the stock dividend. For example, assume an
investor owns 200 shares with a market value of $10 each for a total market value of $2,000. She receives 10
shares as a stock dividend from the company. She now has 210 shares with a total market value of $2,000.
Each share now has a theoretical market value of about $9.52.

Large Stock Dividends
A large stock dividend occurs when a distribution of stock to existing shareholders is greater than 25% of the
total outstanding shares just before the distribution. The accounting for large stock dividends differs from that
of small stock dividends because a large dividend impacts the stock’s market value per share. While there may
be a subsequent change in the market price of the stock after a small dividend, it is not as abrupt as that with
a large dividend.
To illustrate, assume that Duratech Corporation’s balance sheet at the end of its second year of operations
shows the following in the stockholders’ equity section prior to the declaration of a large stock dividend.

886

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Also assume that Duratech’s board of directors declares a 30% stock dividend on the last day of the year, when
the market value of each share of stock was $9. The 30% stock dividend will require the distribution of 60,000
shares times 30%, or 18,000 additional shares of stock. An investor who owns 100 shares will receive 30 shares
in the dividend distribution (30% × 100 shares). The journal entry to record the stock dividend declaration
requires a decrease (debit) to Retained Earnings and an increase (credit) to Common Stock Dividends
Distributable for the par or stated value of the shares to be distributed: 18,000 shares × $0.50, or $9,000. The
journal entry is:

The subsequent distribution will reduce the Common Stock Dividends Distributable account with a debit and
increase the Common Stock account with a credit for the $9,000.

There is no consideration of the market value in the accounting records for a large stock dividend because the
number of shares issued in a large dividend is large enough to impact the market; as such, it causes an
immediate reduction of the market price of the company’s stock.
In comparing the stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet before and after the large stock dividend,
we can see that the total stockholders’ equity is the same before and after the stock dividend, just as it was
with a small dividend (Figure 14.10).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Figure 14.10

887

Stockholders’ Equity Section of the Balance Sheet for Duratech. (attribution: Copyright Rice

University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Similar to distribution of a small dividend, the amounts within the accounts are shifted from the earned capital
account (Retained Earnings) to the contributed capital account (Common Stock) though in different amounts.
The number of shares outstanding has increased from the 60,000 shares prior to the distribution, to the 78,000
outstanding shares after the distribution. The difference is the 18,000 additional shares in the stock dividend
distribution. No change to the company’s assets occurred; however, the potential subsequent increase in
market value of the company’s stock will increase the investor’s perception of the value of the company.

Stock Splits
A traditional stock split occurs when a company’s board of directors issue new shares to existing
shareholders in place of the old shares by increasing the number of shares and reducing the par value of each
share. For example, in a 2-for-1 stock split, two shares of stock are distributed for each share held by a
shareholder. From a practical perspective, shareholders return the old shares and receive two shares for each
share they previously owned. The new shares have half the par value of the original shares, but now the
shareholder owns twice as many. If a 5-for-1 split occurs, shareholders receive 5 new shares for each of the
original shares they owned, and the new par value results in one-fifth of the original par value per share.
While a company technically has no control over its common stock price, a stock’s market value is often
affected by a stock split. When a split occurs, the market value per share is reduced to balance the increase in
the number of outstanding shares. In a 2-for-1 split, for example, the value per share typically will be reduced
by half. As such, although the number of outstanding shares and the price change, the total market value
remains constant. If you buy a candy bar for $1 and cut it in half, each half is now worth $0.50. The total value
of the candy does not increase just because there are more pieces.
A stock split is much like a large stock dividend in that both are large enough to cause a change in the market
price of the stock. Additionally, the split indicates that share value has been increasing, suggesting growth is
likely to continue and result in further increase in demand and value. Companies often make the decision to
split stock when the stock price has increased enough to be out of line with competitors, and the business
wants to continue to offer shares at an attractive price for small investors.

888

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Samsung Boasts a 50-to-1 Stock Split
In May of 2018, Samsung Electronics

[13]

had a 50-to-1 stock split in an attempt to make it easier for

investors to buy its stock. Samsung’s market price of each share prior to the split was an incredible 2.65
won (“won” is a Japanese currency), or $2,467.48. Buying one share of stock at this price is rather
expensive for most people. As might be expected, even after a slight drop in trading activity just after the
split announcement, the reduced market price of the stock generated a significant increase to investors
by making the price per share less expensive. The split caused the price to drop to 0.053 won, or $49.35
per share. This made the stock more accessible to potential investors who were previously unable to
afford a share at $2,467.

A reverse stock split occurs when a company attempts to increase the market price per share by reducing the
number of shares of stock. For example, a 1-for-3 stock split is called a reverse split since it reduces the
number of shares of stock outstanding by two-thirds and triples the par or stated value per share. The effect
on the market is to increase the market value per share. A primary motivator of companies invoking reverse
splits is to avoid being delisted and taken off a stock exchange for failure to maintain the exchange’s minimum
share price.
Accounting for stock splits is quite simple. No journal entry is recorded for a stock split. Instead, the company
prepares a memo entry in its journal that indicates the nature of the stock split and indicates the new par
value. The balance sheet will reflect the new par value and the new number of shares authorized, issued, and
outstanding after the stock split. To illustrate, assume that Duratech’s board of directors declares a 4-for-1
common stock split on its $0.50 par value stock. Just before the split, the company has 60,000 shares of
common stock outstanding, and its stock was selling at $24 per share. The split causes the number of shares
outstanding to increase by four times to 240,000 shares (4 × 60,000), and the par value to decline to one-fourth
of its original value, to $0.125 per share ($0.50 ÷ 4). No change occurs to the dollar amount of any general
ledger account.

The split typically causes the market price of stock to decline immediately to one-fourth of the original
value—from the $24 per share pre-split price to approximately $6 per share post-split ($24 ÷ 4), because the
total value of the company did not change as a result of the split. The total stockholders’ equity on the
company’s balance sheet before and after the split remain the same.

13 Joyce Lee. “Trading in Samsung Electronics Shares Surges after Stock Split.” Reuters. May 3, 2018. https://www.reuters.com/article/ussamsung-elec-stocks/samsung-elec-shares-open-at-53000-won-each-after-501-stock-split-idUSKBN1I500B

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

THINK IT THROUGH
Accounting for a Stock Split
You have just obtained your MBA and obtained your dream job with a large corporation as a manager
trainee in the corporate accounting department. Your employer plans to offer a 3-for-2 stock split. Briefly
indicate the accounting entries necessary to recognize the split in the company’s accounting records and
the effect the split will have on the company’s balance sheet.

YOUR TURN
Dividend Accounting
Cynadyne, Inc.’s has 4,000 shares of $0.20 par value common stock authorized, 2,800 issued, and 400
shares held in treasury at the end of its first year of operations. On May 1, the company declared a $1 per
share cash dividend, with a date of record on May 12, to be paid on May 25. What journal entries will be
prepared to record the dividends?
Solution
A journal entry for the dividend declaration and a journal entry for the cash payout:
To record the declaration:

Date of declaration, May 12, no entry.
To record the payment:

889

890

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

THINK IT THROUGH
Recording Stock Transactions
In your first year of operations the following transactions occur for a company:
• Net profit for the year is $16,000
• 100 shares of $1 par value common stock are issued for $32 per share
• The company purchases 10 shares at $35 per share
• The company pays a cash dividend of $1.50 per share
Prepare journal entries for the above transactions and provide the balance in the following accounts:
Common Stock, Dividends, Paid-in Capital, Retained Earnings, and Treasury Stock.

14.4

Compare and Contrast Owners’ Equity versus Retained Earnings

Owners’ equity represents the business owners’ share of the company. It is often referred to as net worth or
net assets in the financial world and as stockholders’ equity or shareholders’ equity when discussing
businesses operations of corporations. From a practical perspective, it represents everything a company owns
(the company’s assets) minus all the company owes (its liabilities). While “owners’ equity” is used for all three
types of business organizations (corporations, partnerships, and sole proprietorships), only sole
proprietorships name the balance sheet account “owner’s equity” as the entire equity of the company belongs
to the sole owner. Partnerships (to be covered more thoroughly in Partnership Accounting) often label this
section of their balance sheet as “partners’ equity.” All three forms of business utilize different accounting for
the respective equity transactions and use different equity accounts, but they all rely on the same relationship
represented by the basic accounting equation (Figure 14.11).

Figure 14.11

Accounting Equation. The relationship among assets, liabilities, and equity is represented in the

accounting equation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

Three Forms of Business Ownership
Businesses operate in one of three forms—sole proprietorships, partnerships, or corporations. Sole
proprietorships utilize a single account in owners’ equity in which the owner’s investments and net income of
the company are accumulated and distributions to the owner are withdrawn. Partnerships utilize a separate
capital account for each partner, with each capital account holding the respective partner’s investments and
the partner’s respective share of net income, with reductions for the distributions to the respective partners.
Corporations differ from sole proprietorships and partnerships in that their operations are more complex,
often due to size. Unlike these other entity forms, owners of a corporation usually change continuously.
The stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet for corporations contains two primary categories of
accounts. The first is paid-in capital, or contributed capital—consisting of amounts paid in by owners. The
second category is earned capital, consisting of amounts earned by the corporation as part of business
operations. On the balance sheet, retained earnings is a key component of the earned capital section, while

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

891

the stock accounts such as common stock, preferred stock, and additional paid-in capital are the primary
components of the contributed capital section.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Contributed Capital and Earned Capital
The stockholders’ equity section of Cracker Barrel Old Country Store, Inc.’s consolidated balance sheet as of
July 28, 2017, and July 29, 2016, shows the company’s contributed capital and the earned capital accounts.

Characteristics and Functions of the Retained Earnings Account
Retained earnings is the primary component of a company’s earned capital. It generally consists of the
cumulative net income minus any cumulative losses less dividends declared. A basic statement of retained
earnings is referred to as an analysis of retained earnings because it shows the changes in the retained
earnings account during the period. A company preparing a full set of financial statements may choose
between preparing a statement of retained earnings, if the activity in its stock accounts is negligible, or a
statement of stockholders’ equity, for corporations with activity in their stock accounts. A statement of
retained earnings for Clay Corporation for its second year of operations (Figure 14.12) shows the company
generated more net income than the amount of dividends it declared.

14 Cracker Barrel. Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Annual Report 2017. September 22, 2017. http://investor.crackerbarrel.com/static-files/
c05f90b8-1214-4f50-8508-d9a70301f51f

[14]

892

Figure 14.12

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Statement of Retained Earnings for Clay Corporation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
When the retained earnings balance drops below zero, this negative or debit balance is referred to as a deficit
in retained earnings.

Restrictions to Retained Earnings
Retained earnings is often subject to certain restrictions. Restricted retained earnings is the portion of a
company’s earnings that has been designated for a particular purpose due to legal or contractual obligations.
Some of the restrictions reflect the laws of the state in which a company operates. Many states restrict
retained earnings by the cost of treasury stock, which prevents the legal capital of the stock from dropping
below zero. Other restrictions are contractual, such as debt covenants and loan arrangements; these exist to
protect creditors, often limiting the payment of dividends to maintain a minimum level of earned capital.

Appropriations of Retained Earnings
A company’s board of directors may designate a portion of a company’s retained earnings for a particular
purpose such as future expansion, special projects, or as part of a company’s risk management plan. The
amount designated for a particular purpose is classified as appropriated retained earnings.
There are two options in accounting for appropriated retained earnings, both of which allow the corporation
to inform the financial statement users of the company’s future plans. The first accounting option is to make
no journal entry and disclose the amount of appropriation in the notes to the financial statement. The second
option is to record a journal entry that transfers part of the unappropriated retained earnings into an
Appropriated Retained Earnings account. To illustrate, assume that on March 3, Clay Corporation’s board of
directors appropriates $12,000 of its retained earnings for future expansion. The company’s retained earnings
account is first renamed as Unappropriated Retained Earnings. The journal entry decreases the
Unappropriated Retained Earnings account with a debit and increases the Appropriated Retained Earnings
account with a credit for $12,000.

The company will report the appropriate retained earnings in the earned capital section of its balance sheet. It
should be noted that an appropriation does not set aside funds nor designate an income statement, asset, or

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

893

liability effect for the appropriated amount. The appropriation simply designates a portion of the company’s
retained earnings for a specific purpose, while signaling that the earnings are being retained in the company
and are not available for dividend distributions.

Statement of Stockholders’ Equity
The statement of retained earnings is a subsection of the statement of stockholders’ equity. While the retained
earnings statement shows the changes between the beginning and ending balances of the retained earnings
account during the period, the statement of stockholders’ equity provides the changes between the
beginning and ending balances of each of the stockholders’ equity accounts, including retained earnings. The
format typically displays a separate column for each stockholders’ equity account, as shown for Clay
Corporation in Figure 14.13. The key events that occurred during the year—including net income, stock
issuances, and dividends—are listed vertically. The stockholders’ equity section of the company’s balance
sheet displays only the ending balances of the accounts and does not provide the activity or changes during
the period.

Figure 14.13

Statement of Stockholders’ Equity for Clay Corporation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Nearly all public companies report a statement of stockholders’ equity rather than a statement of retained
earnings because GAAP requires disclosure of the changes in stockholders’ equity accounts during each
accounting period. It is significantly easier to see the changes in the accounts on a statement of stockholders’
equity rather than as a paragraph note to the financial statements.

IFRS CONNECTION
Corporate Accounting and IFRS
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the reporting of the various owners’ accounts. Under U.S. GAAP, these
accounts are presented in a statement that is most often called the Statement of Stockholders’ Equity.
Under IFRS, this statement is usually called the Statement of Changes in Equity. Some of the biggest

894

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS that arise in reporting the various accounts that appear in those
statements relate to either categorization or terminology differences.
U.S. GAAP divides owners’ accounts into two categories: contributed capital and retained earnings. IFRS
uses three categories: share capital, accumulated profits and losses, and reserves. The first two IFRS
categories correspond to the two categories used under U.S. GAAP. What about the third category,
reserves? Reserves is a category that is used to report items such as revaluation surpluses from
revaluing long-term assets (see the Long-Term Assets Feature Box: IFRS Connection for details), as well
as other equity transactions such as unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities and
transactions that fall under Other Comprehensive Income (topics typically covered in more advanced
accounting classes). U.S. GAAP does not use the term “reserves” for any reporting.
There are also differences in terminology between U.S. GAAP and IFRS shown in Table 14.1.
Terminology Differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS
U.S. GAAP

IFRS

Common stock

Share capital

Preferred stock

Preference shares

Additional paid-in capital

Share premium

Stockholders

Shareholders

Retained earnings

Retained profits or accumulated profits

Retained earnings deficit

Accumulated losses

Table 14.1
All of this information pertains to publicly traded corporations, but what about corporations that are not
publicly traded? Most corporations in the U.S. are not publicly traded, so do these corporations use U.S.
GAAP? Some do; some do not. A non-public corporation can use cash basis, tax basis, or full accrual basis
of accounting. Most corporations would use a full accrual basis of accounting such as U.S. GAAP. Cash
and tax basis are most likely used only by sole proprietors or small partnerships.
However, U.S. GAAP is not the only full accrual method available to non-public corporations. Two
alternatives are IFRS and a simpler form of IFRS, known as IFRS for Small and Medium Sized Entities, or
SMEs for short. In 2008, the AICPA recognized the IASB as a standard setter of acceptable GAAP and
designated IFRS and IFRS for SMEs as an acceptable set of generally accepted accounting principles.
However, it is up to each State Board of Accountancy to determine if that state will allow the use of IFRS
or IFRS for SMEs by non-public entities incorporated in that state.
What is a SME? Despite the use of size descriptors in the title, qualifying as a small or medium-sized
entity has nothing to do with size. A SME is any entity that publishes general purpose financial
statements for public use but does not have public accountability. In other words, the entity is not
publicly traded. In addition, the entity, even if it is a partnership, cannot act as a fiduciary; for example, it

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

895

cannot be a bank or insurance company and use SME rules.
Why might a non-public corporation want to use IFRS for SMEs? First, IFRS for SMEs contains fewer and
simpler standards. IFRS for SMEs has only about 300 pages of requirements, whereas regular IFRS is over
2,500 pages and U.S. GAAP is over 25,000 pages. Second, IFRS for SMEs is only modified every three
years. This means entities using IFRS for SMEs don’t have to frequently adjust their accounting systems
and reporting to new standards, whereas U.S. GAAP and IFRS are modified more frequently. Finally, if a
corporation transacts business with international businesses, or hopes to attract international partners,
seek capital from international sources, or be bought out by an international company, then having their
financial statements in IFRS form would make these transactions easier.

Prior Period Adjustments
Prior period adjustments are corrections of errors that appeared on previous periods’ financial statements.
These errors can stem from mathematical errors, misinterpretation of GAAP, or a misunderstanding of facts at
the time the financial statements were prepared. Many errors impact the retained earnings account whose
balance is carried forward from the previous period. Since the financial statements have already been issued,
they must be corrected. The correction involves changing the financial statement amounts to the amounts
they would have been had no errors occurred, a process known as restatement. The correction may impact
both balance sheet and income statement accounts, requiring the company to record a transaction that
corrects both. Since income statement accounts are closed at the end of every period, the journal entry will
contain an entry to the Retained Earnings account. As such, prior period adjustments are reported on a
company’s statement of retained earnings as an adjustment to the beginning balance of retained earnings. By
directly adjusting beginning retained earnings, the adjustment has no effect on current period net income.
The goal is to separate the error correction from the current period’s net income to avoid distorting the
current period’s profitability. In other words, prior period adjustments are a way to go back and correct past
financial statements that were misstated because of a reporting error.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Are Companies Making Fewer Errors in Financial Reporting?
According to Kevin LaCroix, additional reporting requirements created by the Sarbanes Oxley Act
prompted a surge in 2005 and 2006 of the number of companies that had to make corrections and
reissue financial statements. However, since that time, the number of companies making corrections has
dropped over 60%, partially due to the number of U.S. companies listed on stock exchanges, and partially
due to tighter regulations. The severity of the errors that caused restatements has declined as well,
primarily due to tighter regulation, which has forced companies to improve their internal controls.

[15]

To illustrate how to correct an error requiring a prior period adjustment, assume that in early 2020, Clay
Corporation’s controller determined it had made an error when calculating depreciation in the preceding year,

15 Kevin M. LaCroix. “Financial Statements Continue to Decline for U.S. Reporting Companies.” The D & O Diary. June 12, 2017.
https://www.dandodiary.com/2017/06/articles/sox-generally/financial-restatements-continue-decline-u-s-reporting-companies/

896

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

resulting in an understatement of depreciation of $1,000. The entry to correct the error contains a decrease to
Retained Earnings on the statement of retained earnings for $1,000. Depreciation expense would have been
$1,000 higher if the correct depreciation had been recorded. The entry to Retained Earnings adds an additional
debit to the total debits that were previously part of the closing entry for the previous year. The credit is to the
balance sheet account in which the $1,000 would have been recorded had the correct depreciation entry
occurred, in this case, Accumulated Depreciation.

Because the adjustment to retained earnings is due to an income statement amount that was recorded
incorrectly, there will also be an income tax effect. The tax effect is shown in the statement of retained
earnings in presenting the prior period adjustment. Assuming that Clay Corporation’s income tax rate is 30%,
the tax effect of the $1,000 is a $300 (30% × $1,000) reduction in income taxes. The increase in expenses in the
amount of $1,000 combined with the $300 decrease in income tax expense results in a net $700 decrease in
net income for the prior period. The $700 prior period correction is reported as an adjustment to beginning
retained earnings, net of income taxes, as shown in Figure 14.14.

Figure 14.14

Statement of Retained Earnings for Clay Corporation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), the set of accounting rules that companies are required to
follow for financial reporting, requires companies to disclose in the notes to the financial statements the
nature of any prior period adjustment and the related impact on the financial statement amounts.

LINK TO LEARNING
The correction of errors in financial statements is a complicated situation. Both shareholders and
investors tend to view these with deep suspicion. Many believe corporations are attempting to smooth
earnings, hide possible problems, or cover up mistakes. The Journal of Accountancy, a periodical

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

897

published by the AICPA, offers guidance in how to manage this process. Browse the Journal of
Accountancy website (https://openstax.org/l/50JournofAcct) for articles and cases of prior period
adjustment issues.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Tune into Financial News
Tune into a financial news program like Squawk Box or Mad Money on CNBC or Bloomberg’s. Notice the
terminology used to describe the corporations being analyzed. Notice the speed at which topics are
discussed. Are these shows for the novice investor? How could this information impact potential
investors?

LINK TO LEARNING
Log onto the Annual Reports website (https://openstax.org/l/50AnnualReports) to access a
comprehensive collection of more than 5,000 annual reports produced by publicly-traded companies. The
site is a tremendous resource for both school and investment-related research. Reading annual reports
provides a different type of insight into corporations. Beyond the financial statements, annual reports
give shareholders and the public a glimpse into the operations, mission, and charitable giving of a
corporation.

14.5

Discuss the Applicability of Earnings per Share as a Method to Measure

Performance
Earnings per share (EPS) measures the portion of a corporation’s profit allocated to each outstanding share
of common stock. Many financial analysts believe that EPS is the single most important tool in assessing a
stock’s market price. A high or increasing earnings per share can drive up a stock price. Conversely, falling
earnings per share can lower a stock’s market price. EPS is also a component in calculating the price-toearnings ratio (the market price of the stock divided by its earnings per share), which many investors find to
be a key indicator of the value of a company’s stock.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Microsoft Earnings Announcements Exceeds Wall Street Targets
While a company’s board of directors makes the final approval of the reports, a key goal of each
company is to look favorable to investors while providing financial statements that accurately reflect the

898

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

financial condition of the company. Each quarter, public companies report EPS through a public
announcement as one of the key measures of their profitability. These announcements are highly
anticipated by investors and analysts. The suspense is heightened because analysts provide earnings
estimates to the public prior to each announcement release. According to Matt Weinberger of Business
Insider, the announcement by Microsoft of its first quarter 2018 EPS reported at $0.95 per share, higher
than analysts’ estimates of $0.85 per share, caused the value of its stock to rise by more than 3% within
hours of the announcement.

[16]

While revenue was the other key metric in Microsoft’s earnings

announcement, EPS carried more weight in the surge of the company’s market price.

Calculating Earnings per Share
Earnings per share is the profit a company earns for each of its outstanding common shares. Both the balance
sheet and income statement are needed to calculate EPS. The balance sheet provides details on the preferred
dividend rate, the total par value of the preferred stock, and the number of common shares outstanding. The
income statement indicates the net income for the period. The formula to calculate basic earnings per share
is:

By removing the preferred dividends from net income, the numerator represents the profit available to
common shareholders. Because preferred dividends represent the amount of net income to be distributed to
preferred shareholders, this portion of the income is obviously not available for common shareholders. While
there are a number of variations of measuring a company’s profit used in the financial world, such as NOPAT
(net operating profit after taxes) and EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization),
GAAP requires companies to calculate EPS based on a corporation’s net income, as this amount appears
directly on a company’s income statement, which for public companies must be audited.
In the denominator, only common shares are used to determine earnings per share because EPS is a measure
of earnings for each common share of stock. The denominator can fluctuate throughout the year as a
company issues and buys back shares of its own stock. The weighted average number of shares is used on the
denominator because of this fluctuation. To illustrate, assume that a corporation began the year with 600
shares of common stock outstanding and then on April 1 issued 1,000 more shares. During the period January
1 to March 31, the company had the original 600 shares outstanding. Once the new shares were issued, the
company had the original 600 plus the new 1,000 shares, for a total of 1,600 shares for each of the next nine
months—from April 1 to December 31. To determine the weighted average shares, apply these fractional
weights to both of the stock amounts, as shown in Figure 14.15.

16 Matt Weinberger. “Microsoft’s Cloud Business Is Driving a Revenue Surge That’s Well above Wall Street Targets.” Business Insider. April 26,
2018. https://www.businessinsider.com/microsoft-q3-fy18-earnings-revenue-eps-analysis-2018-4

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Figure 14.15

899

Weighted Shares. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)
If the shares were not weighted, the calculation would not consider the time period during which the shares
were outstanding.
To illustrate how EPS is calculated, assume Sanaron Company earns $50,000 in net income during 2020. During
the year, the company also declared a $10,000 dividend on preferred stock and a $14,000 dividend on common
stock. The company had 5,000 common shares outstanding the entire year along with 2,000 preferred shares.
Sanaron has generated $8 of earnings ($50,000 less the $10,000 of preferred dividends) for each of the 5,000
common shares of stock it has outstanding.

Earnings per share = $50,000 − $10,000 = $8.00
5,000

THINK IT THROUGH
When a company issued new shares of stock and buys other back as treasury stock, EPS can be
manipulated because both of these transactions affect the number of shares of stock outstanding. What
are ethical considerations involved in calculating EPS?

Measuring Performance with EPS
EPS is a key profitability measure that both current and potential common stockholders monitor. Its
importance is accentuated by the fact that GAAP requires public companies to report EPS on the face of a
company’s income statement. This is only ratio that requires such prominent reporting. If fact, public
companies are required to report two different earnings per share amounts on their income
statements—basic and diluted. We’ve illustrated the calculation of basic EPS. Diluted EPS, which is not
demonstrated here, involves the consideration of all securities such as stocks and bonds that could potentially
dilute, or reduce, the basic EPS.

LINK TO LEARNING
Where can you find EPS information on public companies? Check out the Yahoo Finance website
(https://openstax.org/l/50YahooFinance) and search for EPS data for your favorite corporation.

Common stock shares are normally purchased by investors to generate income through dividends or to sell at

900

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

a profit in the future. Investors realize that inadequate EPS can result in poor or inconsistent dividend
payments and fluctuating stock prices. As such, companies seek to produce EPS amounts that rise each period.
However, an increase in EPS may not always reflect favorable performance, as there are multiple reasons that
EPS may increase. One way EPS can increase is because of increased net income. On the other hand, it can also
increase when a company buys back its own shares of stock. For example, assume that Ranadune Enterprises
generated net income of $15,000 in 2020. In addition, 20,000 shares of common stock and no preferred stock
were outstanding throughout 2020. On January 1, 2020, the company buys back 2,500 shares of its common
stock and holds them as treasury shares. Net income for 2020 stayed static at $15,000. Just before the
repurchasing of the stock, the company’s EPS is $0.75 per share:

Earnings per share =

$15,000 = $0.75 per share
20,000 shares

The purchase of treasury stock in 2020 reduces the common shares outstanding to 17,500 because treasury
shares are considered issued but not outstanding (20,000 − 2,500). EPS for 2020 is now $0.86 per share even
though earnings remains the same.

Earnings per share =

$15,000 = $0.86 per share
17,500 shares

This increase in EPS occurred because the net income is now spread over fewer shares of stock. Similarly, EPS
can decline even when a company’s net income increases if the number of shares increases at a higher degree
than net income. Unfortunately, managers understand how the number of shares outstanding can affect EPS
and are often in position to manipulate EPS by creating transactions that target a desired EPS number.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Stock Buybacks Drive Up Earnings per Share: Ethical?
Public companies can increase their earnings per share by buying their own stock in the open market.
The increase in earnings per share results because the number of shares is reduced by the purchase
even though the earnings remain the same. With fewer shares and the same amount of earnings, the
earnings per share increases without any change in overall profitability or operational efficiency. A
Market Watch article attributing Goldman Sachs states, “S&P 500 companies will spend about $780 billion
on share buybacks in 2017, marking a 30% rise from 2016.”

[17]

An article in Forbes provides some

perspective by pointing out that buying back shares was legalized in 1982, but for the majority of the
twentieth century, corporate buybacks of shares was considered illegal because “they were thought to
be a form of stock market manipulation. . . . Buying back company stock can inflate a company’s share
price and boost its earnings per share—metrics that often guide lucrative executive bonuses.”

[18]

Is a

corporation buying back its shares an ethical way in which to raise or maintain the price of a company’s
shares?

Earnings per share is interpreted differently by different analysts. Some financial experts favor companies with
higher EPS values. The reasoning is that a higher EPS is a reflection of strong earnings and therefore a good

17 C. Linnane and T. Kilgore. “Share Buybacks Will Rise 30% to $780 Billion Next Year, says Goldman Sachs.” Market Watch. November 22,
2016 https://www.marketwatch.com/story/share-buybacks-will-return-with-a-vengeance-next-year-2016-11-21.
18 Arne Alsin. “The Ugly Truth Behind Stock Buybacks.” Forbes. Feb. 28, 2017. https://www.forbes.com/sites/aalsin/2017/02/28/shareholdersshould-be-required-to-vote-on-stock-buybacks/#69b300816b1e

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

901

investment prospect. A more meaningful analysis occurs when EPS is tracked over a number of years, such as
when presented in the comparative income statements for Cracker Barrel Old Country Store, Inc.’s respective
year ends in 2017, 2016, and 2015 shown in Figure 14.16.

[19]

Cracker Barrel’s basic EPS is labeled as “net income

per share: basic.”

Figure 14.16

Consolidated Statements of Income for Cracker Barrel. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Most analysts believe that a consistent improvement in EPS year after year is the indication of continuous
improvement in the earning power of a company. This is what is seen in Cracker Barrel’s EPS amounts over
each of the three years reported, moving from $6.85 to $7.91 to $8.40. However, it is important to remember
that EPS is calculated on historical data, which is not always predictive of the future. In addition, when EPS is
used to compare different companies, significant differences may exist. If companies are in the same industry,
that comparison may be more valuable than if they are in different industries. Basically, EPS should be a tool
used in decision-making, utilized alongside other analytic tools.

YOUR TURN
Would You Have Invested?
What if, in 1997, you invested $5,000 in Amazon? Today, your investment would be worth nearly $1
million. Potential investors viewing Amazon’s income statement in 1997 would have seen an EPS of a
negative $0.11. In other words, Amazon lost $0.11 for each share of common stock outstanding. Would

19 Cracker Barrel. Cracker Barrel Old Country Store 2017 Annual Report. September 22, 2017. http://investor.crackerbarrel.com/static-files/
c05f90b8-1214-4f50-8508-d9a70301f51f

902

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

you have invested?
Solution
Answers will vary. A strong response would include the idea that a negative or small EPS reflects upon
the past historical operations of a company. EPS does not predict the future. Investors in 1997 looked
beyond Amazon’s profitability and saw its business model having strong future potential.

THINK IT THROUGH
Using Earnings per Share in Decision Making
As a valued employee, you have been awarded 10 shares of the company’s stock. Congratulations! How
could you use earnings per share to help you decide whether to hold on to the stock or keep it for the
future?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

903

Key Terms
accounting entity concept concept indicating that the financial activity of an entity (corporation) must be
kept separate from that of the owners
additional paid-in capital account for recording excess of the proceeds received from the issuance of the
stock over the stock’s par value
appropriated retained earnings portion of a company’s retained earnings designated for a particular
purpose such as future expansion, special projects, or as part of a company’s risk management plan
articles of incorporation (also, charter) define the basic structure and purpose of a corporation and the
amount of capital stock that can be issued or sold
authorized shares maximum number of shares that a corporation can issue to investors; approved by state
in which company is incorporated and specified in the corporate charter
brokers buy and sell issues of stock on behalf of others
capital cash and other assets owned by a company
cash dividend corporate earnings that companies pass along to their shareholders in the form of cash
payments
common stock corporation’s primary class of stock issued, with each share representing a partial claim to
ownership or a share of the company’s business
contributed capital owner’s investment (cash and other assets) in the business, which typically comes in the
form of common stock
corporation legal business structure involving one or more individuals (owners) who are legally distinct
(separate) from the business
date of declaration date upon which a company’s board of directors votes and decides to give a cash
dividend to all the company shareholders; the date on which the dividends become a legal liability
date of payment date that cash dividends are paid to shareholders
date of record date the list of dividend eligible shareholders is prepared; no journal entry is required
debt-to-equity ratio measures the portion of debt used by a company relative to the amount of
stockholders’ equity, calculated by dividing total debt by total equity
deficit in retained earnings negative or debit balance
dividend smoothing practice of paying dividends that are relatively equal period after period even when
earnings fluctuate
double taxation occurs when income is taxed to the corporation that earned the income, and then taxed
again to stockholders when they receive a distribution of the corporation’s income as dividends
earned capital capital earned by the corporation as part of business operations
earnings per share (EPS) measurement of the portion of a corporation’s profit allocated to each
outstanding share of common stock
ex dividend status of stock sold between the record date and payment date during which the investor is not
entitled to receive dividends
going concern assumption absent any evidence to the contrary, assumption that a business will continue to
operate in the indefinite future
incorporation process of constituting a company into a legal entity
initial public offering (IPO) when a company issues shares of its stock to the public for the first time
investment banker financial professional who provides advice to companies wishing to issue new stock,
then purchase the stock from the company issuing the stock and resell the securities to the public
issued shares authorized shares that have been sold to shareholders

904

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

large stock dividend stock dividend distribution that is larger than 25% of the total outstanding shares just
before the distribution
market value of stock price at which the stock of public companies trades on the stock market
no-par stock stock issued with no par value assigned to it in a corporate charter
organization costs costs of organizing the corporate entity that include attorney fees, promotion costs, and
filing fees paid to the state
outstanding shares shares that have been issues and are currently held by shareholders
owners’ equity business owners’ share of the company
par value value assigned to stock in the company’s charter and is typically set at a very small arbitrary
amount; serves as legal capital
preemptive right allows stockholders the option to maintain their ownership percentage when new shares
of stock are issued by the company
preferred stock type of stock that entitles the holder to unique preferences that are advantageous over
common stock features
prior period adjustments corrections of errors that occurred on previous periods’ financial statements
private corporation corporation usually owned by a relatively small number of investors; shares are not
traded publicly, and the ownership of the stock is restricted to only those allowed by the board of
directors
property dividend stock dividend distribution of assets other than cash
publicly traded company company whose stock is traded (bought and sold) on an organized stock
exchange
restatement correction of financial statement amounts due to an accounting error in a prior period
restricted retained earnings portion of a company’s earnings that has been designated for a particular
purpose due to legal or contractual obligations
reverse stock split issuance of new shares to existing shareholders in place of the old shares by decreasing
the number of shares and increasing the par value of each share
secondary market organized market where previously issued stocks and bonds can be traded after they are
issued
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) federal regulatory agency that regulates corporations with
shares listed and traded on security exchanges through required periodic filings
small stock dividend stock dividend distribution that is less than 25% of the total outstanding shares just
before the distribution
special dividend one-time extra distribution of corporate earnings to shareholders, usually stemming from a
period of extraordinary earnings or special transaction, such as the sale of a company division
stated value is an amount a board of director’s assigns to each share of a company’s stock; functions as the
legal capital
statement of stockholders’ equity provides the changes between the beginning and ending balances of
each of the stockholders’ equity accounts during the period
stock discount amount at which stock is issued below the par value of stock
stock dividend dividend payment consisting of additional shares rather than cash
stock split issuance of new shares to existing shareholders in place of the old shares by increasing the
number of shares and reducing the par value of each share
stock trading buying and selling of shares by investors and brokers
stockholder owner of stock, or shares, in a business
treasury stock company’s own shares that it has repurchased from investors

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

905

Summary
14.1 Explain the Process of Securing Equity Financing through the Issuance of Stock
• The process of forming a corporation involves several steps, which result in a legal entity that can issue
stock, enter into contracts, buy and sell assets, and borrow funds.
• The corporate form has several advantages, which include the ability to function as a separate legal entity,
limited liability, transferable ownership, continuing existence, and ease of raising capital.
• The disadvantages of operating as a corporation include the costs of organization, regulation, and
potential double taxation.
• There are a number of considerations when choosing whether to finance with debt or equity as a means
to raise capital, including dilution of ownership, the repayment obligation, the cash obligation, budgeting
reliability, cost savings, and the risk assessment by creditors.
• The Securities and Exchange Commission regulates large and small public corporations.
• There are key differences between public corporations that experience an IPO and private corporations.
• A corporation’s shares continue to be bought and sold by the public in the secondary market after an IPO.
• The process of marketing a company’s stock involves several steps.
• Capital stock consists of two classes of stock—common and preferred, each providing the company with
the ability to attract capital from investors.
• Shares of stock are categorized as authorized, issued, and outstanding.
• Shares of stock are measured based on their market or par value. Some stock is no-par, which carries a
stated value.
• A company’s primary class of stock issued is common stock, and each share represents a partial claim to
ownership or a share of the company’s business. Common shareholders have four rights: right to vote,
the right to share in corporate net income through dividends, the right to share in any distribution of
assets upon liquidation, and a preemptive right.
• Preferred stock, by definition, has preferred characteristics, which are more advantageous to
shareholders over common stock characteristics. These include dividend preferences such as cumulative
and participating and a preference for asset distribution upon liquidation. These shares can also be
callable or convertible.
14.2 Analyze and Record Transactions for the Issuance and Repurchase of Stock
• The initial issuance of common stock reflects the sale of the first stock by a corporation.
• Common stock issued at par value for cash creates an additional paid-in capital account for the excess of
the issue price over the par value.
• Stock issued in exchange for property or services is recorded at the fair market value of the stock or the
asset or services received, whichever is more clearly determinable.
• Stock with a stated value is treated as if the stated value is a par value. The entire issue price of no-par
stock with no stated value is credited to the capital stock account.
• Preferred stock issued at par or stated value creates an additional paid-in capital account for the excess of
the issue price over the par value.
• A corporation reports a stock’s par or stated value, the number of shares authorized, issued, and
outstanding, and if preferred, the dividend rate on the face of the balance sheet.
• Treasury stock is a corporation’s stock that the corporation purchased back. A company may buy back its
stock for strategic purposes against competitors, to create demand, or to use for employee stock option
plans.
• The acquisition of treasury stock creates a contra equity account, Treasury Stock, reported in the

906

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
• When a corporation reissues its treasury stock at an amount above the cost, it generates a credit to the
Additional Paid-in Capital from Treasury stock account.
• When a corporation reissues its treasury stock at an amount below cost, the Additional Paid-in Capital
from Treasury stock account is reduced first, then any excess is debited to Retained Earnings.
14.3 Record Transactions and the Effects on Financial Statements for Cash Dividends, Property
Dividends, Stock Dividends, and Stock Splits
• Dividends are a distribution of corporate earnings, though some companies reinvest earnings rather than
declare dividends.
• There are three dividend dates: date of declaration, date of record, and date of payment.
• Cash dividends are accounted for as a reduction of retained earnings and create a liability when declared.
• When dividends are declared and a company has only common stock issued, the reduction of retained
earnings is the amount per share times the number of outstanding shares.
• A property dividend occurs when a company declares and distributes assets other than cash. They are
recorded at the fair market value of the asset being distributed.
• A stock dividend is a distribution of shares of stock to existing shareholders in lieu of a cash dividend.
• A small stock dividend occurs when a stock dividend distribution is less than 25% of the total outstanding
shares based on the outstanding shares prior to the dividend distribution. The entry requires a decrease
to Retained Earnings for the market value of the shares to be distributed.
• A large stock dividend involves a distribution of stock to existing shareholders that is larger than 25% of
the total outstanding shares just before the distribution. The journal entry requires a decrease to
Retained Earnings and a credit to Stock Dividends Distributable for the par or stated value of the shares to
be distributed.
• Some corporations employ stock splits to keep their stock price competitive in the market. A traditional
stock split occurs when a company’s board of directors issues new shares to existing shareholders in
place of the old shares by increasing the number of shares and reducing the par value of each share.
14.4 Compare and Contrast Owners’ Equity versus Retained Earnings
• Owner’s equity reflects an owner’s investment value in a company.
• The three forms of business utilize different accounts and transactions relative to owners’ equity.
• Retained earnings is the primary component of a company’s earned capital. It generally consists of the
cumulative net income minus any cumulative losses less dividends declared. A statement of retained
earnings shows the changes in the retained earnings account during the period.
• Restricted retained earnings is the portion of a company’s earnings that has been designated for a
particular purpose due to legal or contractual obligations.
• A company’s board of directors may designate a portion of a company’s retained earnings for a particular
purpose such as future expansion, special projects, or as part of a company’s risk management plan. The
amount designated is classified as appropriated retained earnings.
• The statement of stockholders’ equity provides the changes between the beginning and ending balances
of each of the stockholders’ equity accounts, including retained earnings.
• Prior period adjustments are corrections of errors that occurred on previous periods’ financial
statements. They are reported on a company’s statement of retained earnings as an adjustment to the
beginning balance.
14.5 Discuss the Applicability of Earnings per Share as a Method to Measure Performance
• Earnings per share (EPS) measures the portion of a corporation’s profit allocated to each outstanding
share of common stock.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

907

• EPS is calculated by dividing the profit earned for common shareholders by the weighted average
common shares of stock outstanding.
• Because EPS is a key profitability measure that both current and potential common stockholders monitor,
it is important to understand how to interpret it.

Multiple Choice
1.

14.1 Which of the following is not a characteristic that sets preferred stock apart from common stock?
A.

voting rights

B.

dividend payments

C.

transferability

D.

ownership

2.

14.1 Issued stock is defined as stock that ________.
A.

is available for sale

B.

that is held by the corporation

C.

has been sold to investors

D.

has no voting rights

3.

14.1 Your friend is considering incorporating and asks for advice. Which of the following is not a major

concern?
A.

colors for the logo

B.

which state in which to incorporate

C.

number of shares of stock to authorize

D.

selection of the corporation name

4.

14.1 Par value of a stock refers to the ________.
A.

issue price of a stock

B.

value assigned by the incorporation documents

C.

maximum selling price of a stock

D.

dividend to be paid by the corporation

5.

14.1 Which of the following is not one of the five primary responsibilities of the Securities and Exchange

Commission (the SEC)?
A.

inform and protect investors

B.

regulate securities law

C.

facilitate capital formation

D.

assure that dividends are paid by corporations

6.

14.1 When a C corporation has only one class of stock it is referred to as ________.
A.

stated value stock

B.

par value stock

C.

common stock

D.

preferred stock

908

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

7.

14.1 The number of shares that a corporation’s incorporation documents allows it to sell is referred to as

________.
A.

issued stock

B.

outstanding stock

C.

common stock

D.

authorized stock

8.

14.2 The total amount of cash and other assets received by a corporation from the stockholders in

exchange for the shares is ________.
A.

always equal to par value

B.

referred to as retained earnings

C.

always below its stated value

D.

referred to as paid-in capital

9.

14.2 Stock can be issued for all except which of the following?
A.

accounts payable

B.

state income tax payments

C.

property such as a delivery truck

D.

services provided to the corporation such as legal fees

10.

14.3 A company issued 40 shares of $1 par value common stock for $5,000. The journal entry to record

the transaction would include which of the following?
A.

debit of $4,000 to common stock

B.

credit of $20,000 to common stock

C.

credit of $40 to common stock

D.

debit of $20,000 to common stock

11.

14.3 A company issued 30 shares of $.50 par value common stock for $12,000. The credit to additional

paid-in capital would be ________.
A.

$11,985

B.

$12,000

C.

$15

D.

$10,150

12.

14.3 A corporation issued 100 shares of $100 par value preferred stock for $150 per share. The resulting

journal entry would include which of the following?
A.

a credit to common stock

B.

a credit to cash

C.

a debit to paid-in capital in excess of preferred stock

D.

a debit to cash

13.

14.3 The date the board of directors votes to declare and pay a cash dividend is called the:
A.

date of stockholder’s meeting

B.

date of payment

C.

date of declaration

D.

date of liquidation

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

14.

909

14.3 Which of the following is true of a stock dividend?
A.

It is a liability.

B.

The decision to issue a stock dividend resides with shareholders.

C.

It does not affect total equity but transfers amounts between equity components.

D.

It creates a cash reserve for shareholders.

15.

14.4 Stockholders’ equity consists of which of the following?
A.

bonds payable

B.

retained earnings and accounts receivable

C.

retained earnings and paid-in capital

D.

discounts and premiums on bond payable

16.

14.4 Retained earnings is accurately described by all except which of the following statements?
A.

Retained earnings is the primary component of a company’s earned capital.

B.

Dividends declared are added to retained earnings.

C.

Net income is added to retained earnings.

D.

Net losses are accumulated in the retained earnings account.

17.

14.4 If a company’s board of directors designates a portion of earnings for a particular purpose due to

legal or contractual obligations, they are designated as ________.
A.

retained earnings payable

B.

appropriated retained earnings

C.

cumulative retained earnings

D.

restricted retained earnings

18.

14.4 Corrections of errors that occurred on a previous period’s financial statements are called ________.
A.

restrictions

B.

deficits

C.

prior period adjustments

D.

restatements

19.

14.4 Owner’s equity represents which of the following?
A.

the amount of funding the company has from issuing bonds

B.

the sum of the retained earnings and accounts receivable account balances

C.

the total of retained earnings plus paid-in capital

D.

the business owner’s/owners’ share of the company, also known as net worth or net assets

20.

14.5 Which of the following is a measurement of earnings that represents the profit before interest,

taxes, depreciation and amortization are subtracted?
A.

net income

B.

retained earnings

C.

EBITDA

D.

EPS

21.

14.5 Which of the following measures the portion of a corporation’s profit allocated to each outstanding

share of common stock?
A.

retained earnings

B.

EPS

C.

EBITDA

D.

NOPAT

910

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

22.

14.5 The measurement of earnings concept that consists of a company’s profit from operations after

taxed are subtracted is ________.
A.

ROI

B.

EPS

C.

EBITDA

D.

NOPAT

23.

14.5 The correct formula for the calculation of earnings per share is ________.
A.

(Net income + Preferred dividends) / Weighted average common shares outstanding

B.

Net income / Weighted average common shares outstanding

C.

(Net income – Preferred dividends) / Weighted average common shares outstanding

D.

(Net income – Preferred dividends) / Treasury shares outstanding

24.

14.5 Most analysts believe which of the following is true about EPS?
A.

Consistent improvement in EPS year after year is the indication of continuous improvement in the
company’s earning power.

B.

Consistent improvement in EPS year after year is the indication of continuous decline in the company’s
earning power.

C.

Consistent improvement in EPS year after year is the indication of fraud within the company.

D.

Consistent improvement in EPS year after year is the indication that the company will never suffer a
year of net loss rather than net income.

Questions
1.

14.1 Your corporation needs additional capital to fund an expansion. Discuss the advantages and

disadvantages of raising capital through the issuance of stock. Would debt be a better option? Why or why
not?
2.

14.1 How many shares of stock should your new corporation authorize? How did you arrive at your

number?
3.

14.1 What factors should a new company consider in deciding in which state to incorporate?

4.

14.1 What are some of the reasons a business owner might choose the corporate form of business?

5.

14.2 Why would a company repurchase its own stock?

6.

14.2 The following data was reported by Saturday Corporation:
• Authorized shares: 30,000
• Issued shares: 25,000
• Treasury shares: 5,000

How many shares are outstanding?
7.

14.2 A corporation issues 6,000 shares of $1 par value stock for a parcel of land valued at $12,000.

Prepare the journal entry to reflect this transaction.
8.

14.2 When corporations issue stock in exchange for professional services, what account(s) should be

debited and what account(s) should be credited?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

9.

911

14.2 A corporation issues 5,000 shares of $1 par value stock for some equipment with a clearly

determined value of $10,000. Prepare the journal entry to reflect this transaction.
10.

14.3 On April 2, West Company declared a cash dividend of $0.50 per share. There are 50,000 shares

outstanding. What is the journal entry that should be recorded?
11.

14.3 Assuming the same facts as Exercise 59., what is the journal that should be recorded on May 5, the

date of payment?
12.

14.3 When does a corporation incur a liability for a dividend?

13.

14.3 How does a stock split affect the balance sheet of a corporation?

14.

14.4 Your friend has questions about retained earnings and dividends. How do you explain to him that

dividends are paid out of retained earnings?
15.

14.4 What does owners’ equity mean for the owner?

16.

14.4 What types of transactions reduce owner’s equity? What types of transactions reduce retained

earnings? What do they have in common?
17.

14.4 Sometimes financial statements contain errors. What type of liabilities may need correction as a

prior period adjustment?
18.

14.4 Retained earnings may be restricted or appropriated. Explain the difference between the two and

give an example of when each may be used.
19.

14.5 Which financial statements do you need to calculate EPS?

20.

14.5 Where is EPS disclosed for publicly traded companies?

21.

14.5 Should investors rely on EPS as an investing tool? Why or why not?

22.

14.5 What information do you need to calculate the weighted average common shares outstanding?

23.

14.5 Which is the only ratio required to be reported on the face of a company’s financial statements?

What are the two ways the ratio is required to be reported?

Exercise Set A
EA1.

14.1 You are an accountant working for a company that has recently decided to incorporate. The

company has incurred $4,300 for attorney’s fees, promotion costs, and filing fees with the state of
incorporation as a part of organizing the corporate entity. What is the journal entry to record these costs on
March 13, assuming they are paid in cash?
EA2.

14.1 What is the impact on stockholders’ equity when a company uses debt financing as a source of

funding?
EA3.

14.1 What is the most obvious difference between debt and equity financing?

EA4.

14.1 How do creditors assess risk when lending funds to a company?

912

EA5.

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

14.2 Fortuna Company is authorized to issue 1,000,000 shares of $1 par value common stock. In its

first year, the company has the following transactions:
Jan. 31

Issued 40,000 shares at $10 share

Jun. 10

Issued 100,000 shares in exchange for land with a clearly determined value of $850,000

Aug. 3

Purchased 10,000 shares of treasury stock at $9 per share

Journalize the transactions and calculate how many shares of stock are outstanding at August 3.
EA6.

14.2 James Incorporated is authorized to issue 5,000,000 shares of $1 par value common stock. In its

second year of business, the company has the following transactions:
Mar. 31

Issued 30,000 shares at $10 share

Jul. 9

Issued 100,000 shares in exchange for a building with a clearly determined value of $700,000

Aug. 30

Purchased 7,000 shares of treasury stock at $9 per share

Journalize the transactions.
EA7.

14.2 McVie Corporation’s stock has a par value of $2. The company has the following transactions

during the year:
Feb. 28

Issued 300,000 shares at $5 share

Jun. 7

Issued 90,000 shares in exchange for equipment with a clearly determined value of $200,000

Sep. 19

Purchased 3,000 shares of treasury stock at $7 per share

Journalize the transactions.
EA8.

14.2 Anslo Fabricating, Inc. is authorized to issue 10,000,000 shares of $5 stated value common stock.

During the year, the company has the following transactions:
Jan. 3

Issued 60,000 shares at $10 share

Jun. 15

Issued 5,000 shares in exchange for office equipment with a clearly determined value of $50,000

Aug. 16

Purchased 4,000 shares of treasury stock at $20 per share

Journalize the transactions.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

EA9.

913

14.2 St. Marie Company is authorized to issue 1,000,000 shares of $5 par value preferred stock, and

5,000,000 shares of $1 stated value common stock. During the year, the company has the following
transactions:
Jan. 31

Issued 140,000 common shares at $10 share

Jun. 10

Issued 160,000 preferred shares in exchange for land with a clearly determined value of $850,000

Aug. 3

Issued 10,000 shares of common stock for $9 per share

Journalize the transactions.
EA10.

14.3 Nutritious Pet Food Company’s board of directors declares a cash dividend of $1.00 per common

share on November 12. On this date, the company has issued 12,000 shares but 2,000 shares are held as
treasury shares. What is the journal entry to record the declaration of this dividend?
EA11.

14.3 Nutritious Pet Food Company’s board of directors declares a cash dividend of $1.00 per common

share on November 12. On this date, the company has issued 12,000 shares but 2,000 shares are held as
treasury shares. The company pays the dividend on December 14. What is the journal entry to record the
payment of the dividend?
EA12.

14.3 Nutritious Pet Food Company’s board of directors declares a cash dividend of $5,000 on June 30.

At that time, there are 3,000 shares of $5 par value 5% preferred stock outstanding and 7,000 shares of $1 par
value common stock outstanding (none held in treasury). What is the journal entry to record the declaration of
the dividend?
EA13.

14.3 Nutritious Pet Food Company’s board of directors declares a small stock dividend (20%) on June

30 when the stock’s market value per share is $30. At that time, there are 10,000 shares of $1 par value
common stock outstanding (none held in treasury). What is the journal entry to record the declaration of the
dividend?
EA14.

14.4 Blanket Company has paid quarterly dividends every quarter for the past 15 years. Lately,

slowing sales have created a cash crunch for the company. While the company still has positive retained
earnings, the retained earnings balance is close to zero. Should the company borrow to continue to pay
dividends? Why or why not?
EA15.

14.4 Farmington Corporation began the year with a retained earnings balance of $20,000. The

company paid a total of $3,000 in dividends and earned a net income of $60,000 this year. What is the ending
retained earnings balance?
EA16.

14.4 Montana Incorporated began the year with a retained earnings balance of $50,000. The

company paid a total of $5,000 in dividends and experienced a net loss of $25,000 this year. What is the ending
retained earnings balance?

914

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

EA17.

14.4 Jesse and Mason Fabricating, Inc. general ledger has the following account balances at the end

of the year:

What is the total ending balance as reported on the company’s Statement of Stockholder’s Equity?
EA18.

14.4 Roxanne’s Delightful Candies, Inc. began the year with a retained earnings balance of $45,000.

The company had a great year and earned a net income of $80,000. However, the company’s controller
determined that it had made an error when calculating depreciation in the preceding year, resulting in an
understated depreciation expense amount of $2,000. What is the ending retained earnings balance?
EA19.

14.5 Jupiter Corporation earned net income of $90,000 this year. The company began the year with

600 shares of common stock and issued 500 more on April 1. They issued $5,000 in preferred dividends for the
year. What is Jupiter Corporation’s weighted average number of shares for the year?
EA20.

14.5 Longmont Corporation earned net income of $90,000 this year. The company began the year

with 600 shares of common stock and issued 500 more on April 1. They issued $5,000 in preferred dividends
for the year. What is the numerator of the EPS calculation for Longmont?
EA21.

14.5 James Corporation earned net income of $90,000 this year. The company began the year with

600 shares of common stock and issued 500 more on April 1. They issued $5,000 in preferred dividends for the
year. What is the EPS for the year for James (rounded to the nearest dollar)?

B

EB1.

Exercise Set B
14.1 Your high school friend started a business that has blossomed over the years, and she is

considering incorporating so she can sell shares of stock and expand. She has asked you for help
understanding the process she will need to undertake. How do you explain the process of incorporation to
her?
EB2.

14.1 You are an accountant working for a manufacturing company that makes personal care products

and has recently decided to incorporate. The company incurred a total of $7,900 for attorney’s fees, promotion
costs, and filing fees with the state of incorporation as a part of organizing the corporate entity. What is the
journal entry to record these costs on February 28, assuming they are paid in cash?
EB3.

14.1 What is the impact on stockholders’ equity when a company uses equity financing as a source of

funding?
EB4.

14.1 What is the biggest disadvantage to be considered when exploring the option of equity financing

versus debt financing?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

EB5.

915

14.1 Your high school friend started a business that has blossomed over the years, and he is

considering incorporating so he can sell shares of stock and expand. He has asked you for help understanding
the costs of incorporating. What are some of the costs that he will face as he organizes the corporation and
begins to sell shares of stock?
EB6.

14.2 Spring Company is authorized to issue 500,000 shares of $2 par value common stock. In its first

year, the company has the following transactions:
Mar. 1

Issued 40,000 shares of stock at $9.75 per share

Apr. 10

Issued 1,000 shares of stock for legal services valued at $10,000.

Oct. 3

Purchased 1,000 shares of treasury stock at $9 per share

Journalize the transactions and calculate how many shares of stock are outstanding at August 3.
EB7.

14.2 Silva Company is authorized to issue 5,000,000 shares of $2 par value common stock. In its IPO,

the company has the following transaction: Mar. 1, issued 500,000 shares of stock at $15.75 per share for cash
to investors. Journalize this transaction.
EB8.

14.2 Juniper Company is authorized to issue 5,000,000 shares of $2 par value common stock. In

conjunction with its incorporation process and the IPO, the company has the following transaction: Mar. 1,
issued 4,000 shares of stock in exchange for equipment worth $250,000. Journalize the transaction.
EB9.

14.2 Vishnu Company is authorized to issue 500,000 shares of $2 par value common stock. In

conjunction with its incorporation process and the IPO, the company has the following transaction: Apr. 10,
issued 1,000 shares of stock for legal services valued at $15,000. Journalize the transaction.
EB10.

14.2 Ammon Company is authorized to issue 500,000 shares of $5 par value preferred stock. In its

first year, the company has the following transaction: Mar. 1, issued 40,000 shares of preferred stock at $20.50
per share. Journalize the transaction.
EB11.

14.3 Nutritious Pet Food Company’s board of directors declares a small stock dividend (20%) on June

30 when the stock’s market value per share is $30. At that time, there are 10,000 shares of $1 par value
common stock outstanding (none held in treasury). What is the journal entry to record the stock dividend
distribution on July 31?
EB12.

14.3 Nutritious Pet Food Company’s board of directors declares a large stock dividend (50%) on June

30 when the stock’s market value per share is $30. At that time, there are 10,000 shares of $1 par value
common stock outstanding (none held in treasury). What is the journal entry to record the declaration of the
dividend?
EB13.

14.3 Nutritious Pet Food Company’s board of directors declares a large stock dividend (50%) on June

30 when the stock’s market value per share is $30. At that time, there are 10,000 shares of $1 par value
common stock outstanding (none held in treasury). What is the journal entry to record the stock dividend
distribution on July 31?
EB14.

14.3 Nutritious Pet Food Company’s board of directors declares a 2-for-1 stock split on June 30 when

the stock’s market value per share is $30. At that time, there are 10,000 shares of $1 par value common stock
outstanding (none held in treasury). What is the new par value of the shares and how many shares are
outstanding after the split?

916

EB15.

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

14.3 Nutritious Pet Food Company’s board of directors declares a 2-for-1 stock split on June 30 when

the stock’s market value per share is $30. At that time, there are 10,000 shares of $1 par value common stock
outstanding (none held in treasury). What is the new par value of the shares and how many shares are
outstanding after the split? What is the total amount of equity before and after the split?
EB16.

14.4 Birmingham Company has been in business for five years. Last year, it experienced rapid growth

and hired a new accountant to oversee the physical assets and record acquisitions and depreciation. This year,
the controller discovered that the accounting records were not in order when the new accountant took over,
and a $3,000 depreciation entry was omitted resulting in depreciation expense being understated last year.
How does the company make this type of correction and where is it reported?
EB17.

14.4 Chelsea Company is a sole proprietorship. Ashley, Incorporated is a corporation. Which

company would report stockholder’s equity and retained earnings and not simply owner’s equity? Why? What
is the difference between these accounts?
EB18.

14.4 Tart Restaurant Holdings, Incorporated began the year with a retained earnings balance of

$950,000. The company paid a total of $14,000 in dividends and experienced a net loss of $20,000 this year.
What is the ending retained earnings balance?
EB19.

14.4 Josue Fabricating, Inc.’s accountant has the following information available to prepare the

Statement of Stockholder’s Equity for the year just ended.

What is the total balance on the company’s Statement of Stockholder’s Equity? What is the amount of the
contributed capital?
EB20.

14.4 Trumpet and Trombone Manufacturing, Inc. began the year with a retained earnings balance of

$545,000. The company had a great year and earned a net income of $190,000 this year and paid dividends of
$14,000. Additionally, the company’s controller determined that it had made an error when calculating tax
expense in the preceding year, resulting in an understated expense amount of $22,000. What is the ending
retained earnings balance?
EB21.

14.5 Brunleigh Corporation earned net income of $200,000 this year. The company began the year

with 10,000 shares of common stock and issued 5,000 more on April 1. They issued $7,500 in preferred
dividends for the year. What is Brunleigh Corporation’s weighted average number of shares for the year?
EB22.

14.5 Errol Corporation earned net income of $200,000 this year. The company began the year with

10,000 shares of common stock and issued 5,000 more on April 1. They issued $7,500 in preferred dividends for
the year. What is the numerator of the EPS calculation for Errol?
EB23.

14.5 Bastion Corporation earned net income of $200,000 this year. The company began the year with

10,000 shares of common stock and issued 5,000 more on April 1. They issued $7,500 in preferred dividends for
the year. What is the EPS for the year for Bastion?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

917

Problem Set A
PA1.

14.1 You are a CPA who has been hired by DEF Company to assist with their initial public offering.

Prepare a memo to the president of DEF outlining the steps you will take to launch the IPO.
PA2.

14.1 You are a CPA who has been hired by DEF Company to assist with their incorporation process.

Prepare a memo to the president of DEF explaining the different statuses of shares of stock: authorized
shares, issued shares, outstanding shares, and treasury shares.
PA3.

14.1 You are a CPA who has been hired by DEF Company to assist with their initial public offering.

Prepare a memo to the president of DEF outlining the two most significant values, market value and par value,
associated with stock.
PA4.

14.2 Wingra Corporation was organized in March. It is authorized to issue 500,000 shares of $100 par

value 8% preferred stock. It is also authorized to issue 750,000 shares of $1 par value common stock. In its first
year, the corporation has the following transactions:
Mar. 1

Issued 10,000 shares of preferred stock at $115 per share

Mar. 2

Issued 120,000 shares of common stock at $12.50 per share

Apr. 10

Issued 15,000 shares of common stock for equipment valued at $196,000. The stock is currently
trading at $12 per share, and is a more reliable indicator of the value of the equipment.

Jun. 12

Issued 10,000 shares of common stock at $15 per share

Aug. 5

Issued 1,000 shares of preferred stock at $112 per share

Journalize the transactions.
PA5.

14.2 Copper Corporation was organized in May. It is authorized to issue 50,000,000 shares of $200 par

value 7% preferred stock. It is also authorized to issue 75,000,000 shares of $5 par value common stock. In its
first year, the corporation has the following transactions:
May 1

Issued 1,000 shares of preferred stock for cash at $250 per share

May 23

Issued 2,000 shares of common stock at $15.50 per share

Jun. 10

Issued 15,000 shares of common stock for equipment without a readily determinable value. The
stock is currently trading at $15 per share.

Journalize the transactions.

918

PA6.

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

14.2 EllaJane Corporation was organized several years ago and was authorized to issue 4,000,000

shares of $50 par value 6% preferred stock. It is also authorized to issue 1,750,000 shares of $1 par value
common stock. In its fifth year, the corporation has the following transactions:
Mar. 1

Purchased 1,000 shares of its own common stock at $11 per share

Apr. 10

Reissued 500 shares of its common stock held in the treasury for $15 per share.

Jun. 12

Reissued 500 shares of common stock at $9 per share

Journalize the transactions.
PA7.

14.3 Aggregate Mining Corporation was incorporated five years ago. It is authorized to issue 500,000

shares of $100 par value 8% preferred stock. It is also authorized to issue 750,000 shares of $1 par value
common stock. It has issued only 50,000 of the common shares and none of the preferred shares. In its sixth
year, the corporation has the following transactions:
Mar. 1

Declares a cash dividend of $2 per share

Mar. 30

Pays the cash dividend

Jul. 10

Declares a 5% stock dividend when the stock is trading at $15 per share

Aug. 5

Issues the stock dividend

Journalize these transactions.
PA8.

14.3 Aggregate Mining Corporation was incorporated five years ago. It is authorized to issue 500,000

shares of $100 par value 8% preferred stock. It is also authorized to issue 750,000 shares of $1 par value
common stock. It has issued only 50,000 of the common shares and none of the preferred shares. In its
seventh year, the corporation has the following transactions:
Mar. 1

Declares a cash dividend of $5 per share

Mar. 30

Pays the cash dividend

Jul. 10

Declares a property dividend of 1/2 ton of limestone per share when the price of limestone is
$25 per ton

Journalize these transactions.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

PA9.

919

14.3 Aggregate Mining Corporation was incorporated five years ago. It is authorized to issue 500,000

shares of $100 par value 8% cumulative preferred stock. It is also authorized to issue 750,000 shares of $6 par
value common stock. It has issued 50,000 of the common shares and 1,000 of the cumulative preferred shares.
The corporation has never declared a dividend and the preferred shares are one years in arrears. Aggregate
Mining has the following transactions this year:
Mar. 1

Declares a cash dividend of $20,000

Mar. 30

Pays the cash dividend

Jul. 10

Declares a 3-for-1 stock split of its common shares

Journalize these transactions. For the stock split, show the calculation for how many shares are outstanding
after the split and the par value per share after the split
PA10.

14.4 The board of directors is interested in investing in a new technology. Appropriating existing

retained earnings is a choice for funding the new technology. You are a consultant to the board. How would
you explain this option to the board members so that they could make an educated decision?
PA11.

14.4 You are a consultant for several emerging, high-growth technology firms that were started

locally and have been a part of a business incubator in your area. These firms start out as sole proprietorships
but quickly realize the need for more capital and often incorporate. One of the common questions you are
asked is about stockholder’s equity. Explain the characteristics and functions of the retained earnings account
and how the account is different from contributed capital.
PA12.

14.4 You are the accountant for Kamal Fabricating, Inc. and you oversee the preparation of financial

statements for the year just ended 6/30/2020. You have the following information from the company’s general
ledger and other financial reports (all balances are end-of-year except for those noted otherwise:

Prepare the company’s Statement of Retained Earnings.
PA13.

14.5 You have some funds that you would like to invest. Do some internet research to find two

publicly traded companies in the same industry and compare their earnings per share. Would the earnings per
share reported by each company influence your decision in selecting which company to invest in?
PA14.

14.5 You are a consultant working with various companies that are considering incorporating and

listing shares on a stock exchange. Explain the importance of the EPS calculation to financial analysts who
follow companies on the stock exchanges.

920

B

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

Problem Set B

PB1.

14.1 You are the president of Duke Company and are leading the company through the process of

incorporation. The next step is determining the type of stock the company should offer. You are relying on
feedback from several key executives at Duke to help you assess the wisdom in this decision. Prepare a memo
to your executive team outlining the differences between common stock and preferred stock. The memo
should be complete enough to assist them with assessing differences and providing you with robust
feedback.
PB2.

14.1 You are the president of Duke Company and are leading the company through the process of

incorporation. The company has determined that common stock shares will be issued, but several key
executives at Duke are not quite sure they understand the preemptive right feature associated with common
shares. Prepare a memo to your executive team outlining the meaning of this right.
PB3.

14.2 Autumn Corporation was organized in August. It is authorized to issue 100,000 shares of $100 par

value 7% preferred stock. It is also authorized to issue 500,000 shares of $5 par value common stock. During
the year, the corporation had the following transactions:
Aug. 22

Issued 2,000 shares of preferred stock at $105 per share

Sep. 3

Issued 80,000 shares of common stock at $13.25 per share

Oct. 11

Issued 12,000 shares of common stock for land valued at $156,000. The stock is currently trading
at $12 per share, and the stock’s trading value is a more accurate determinant of the land’s
value.

Nov. 12

Issued 5,000 shares of common stock at $15 per share

Dec. 5

Issued 1,000 shares of preferred stock at $112 per share

Journalize the transactions.
PB4.

14.2 MacKenzie Mining Corporation is authorized to issue 50,000 shares of $500 par value 7%

preferred stock. It is also authorized to issue 5,000,000 shares of $3 par value common stock. In its first year,
the corporation has the following transactions:
May 1

Issued 3,000 shares of preferred stock for cash at $750 per share

May 23

Issued 6,000 shares of common stock at $12.50 per share

Jun. 10

Issued 5,000 shares of common stock for equipment without a readily determinable value. The
stock is currently trading at $11 per share

Journalize the transactions.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

PB5.

921

14.2 Paydirt Limestone, Incorporated was organized several years ago and was authorized to issue

3,000,000 shares of $40 par value 9% preferred stock. It is also authorized to issue 3,750,000 shares of $2 par
value common stock. In its fifth year, the corporation has the following transactions:
Mar. 1

Purchased 2,000 shares of its own common stock at $15 per share

Apr. 10

Reissued 1,000 shares of its common stock held in the treasury for $18 per share.

Jun. 12

Reissued 1,000 shares of common stock at $12 per share

Journalize the transactions.
PB6.

14.3 Tent & Tarp Corporation is a manufacturer of outdoor camping equipment. The company was

incorporated ten years ago. It is authorized to issue 50,000 shares of $10 par value 5% preferred stock. It is
also authorized to issue 500,000 shares of $1 par value common stock. It has issued 5,000 common shares and
none of the preferred shares. Tent & Tarp has the following transactions:
Mar. 1

Declares a cash dividend of $3 per share

Mar. 30

Pays the cash dividend

Jul. 10

Declares a 35% stock dividend when the stock is trading at $15 per share

Aug. 5

Issues the stock dividend

Journalize these transactions.
PB7.

14.3 Tent & Tarp Corporation is a manufacturer of outdoor camping equipment. The company was

incorporated ten years ago. It is authorized to issue 50,000 shares of $10 par value 5% preferred stock. It is
also authorized to issue 500,000 shares of $1 par value common stock. It has issued 5,000 common shares and
none of the preferred shares. Tent & Tarp has the following transactions:
Mar. 1

Declares a cash dividend of $5 per share

Mar. 30

Pays the cash dividend

Jul. 10

Declares a property dividend of one 6-person camping tent per share of stock when the price
per tent is $150.

Journalize these transactions.

922

PB8.

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

14.3 Tent & Tarp Corporation is a manufacturer of outdoor camping equipment. The company was

incorporated ten years ago. It is authorized to issue 50,000 shares of $10 par value 5% preferred stock. It is
also authorized to issue 500,000 shares of $1 par value common stock. It has issued 5,000 common shares and
2,000 of the preferred shares. The corporation has never declared a dividend and the preferred shares are one
years in arrears. Tent & Tarp has the following transactions:
Mar. 1

Declares a cash dividend of $10,000

Mar. 30

Pays the cash dividend

Jul. 10

Declares a 5-for-1 stock split of its common shares

Journalize these transactions. For the stock split, show the calculation for how many shares are outstanding
after the split and the par value per share after the split
PB9.

14.4 You are a CPA working with sole proprietors. Several of your clients are considering incorporating

because they need to expand and grow. One client is curious about how her financial reports will change.
She’s heard that she may need to prepare a statement of retained earnings and a statement of stockholder’s
equity. She’s confused about the difference between the two and what they report. How would you explain the
characteristics and functions of the two types of statements?
PB10.

14.4 You are a consultant for several emerging, high growth technology firms that were started

locally and have been a part of a business incubator in your area. These firms start out as sole proprietorships
but quickly realize the need for more capital and often incorporate. One of the common questions you get is
about stockholder’s equity. Explain the key ways the companies need to view retained earnings if they want to
use it as a source of capital for future expansion and growth after incorporating.
PB11.

14.4 You are the accountant for Trumpet and Trombone Manufacturing, Inc. and you oversee the

preparation of financial statements for the year just ended 6/30/2020. You have the following information
from the company’s general ledger and other financial reports (all balances are end-of-year except for those
noted otherwise):

Prepare the company’s Statement of Retained Earnings
PB12.

14.5 You have some funds that you would like to invest and you are relying heavily on the EPS

calculation to help you make your decision. Initially you are baffled about why preferred dividends are
subtracted in the numerator and why a weighted average is used in the denominator, so you do some
research and reflection and come to understand why. Your friend is interested in hearing about your thought
process. How would you explain to your friend why it’s important to subtract preferred dividends and to use
weighted averages?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

PB13.

923

14.5 You are a consultant working with various companies that are considering incorporating and

listing shares on a stock exchange. One of your clients asks you about the various acronyms she has been
hearing in conjunction with financial analysis. Explain the following acronyms and how they measure different
things but may complement each other: EPS (earnings per share), EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation, and amortization), and NOPAT (net operating profit after taxes).

Thought Provokers
TP1.

14.1 Your bakery is incorporated and is looking for investors. Write a one paragraph story of why

investors should buy stock in your company. What makes your bakery special?
TP2.

14.1 Do some research: why did Facebook choose to reincorporate in Delaware?

TP3.

14.1 Do some research: why is Comcast incorporated in Pennsylvania?

TP4.

14.2 On November 7, 2013, Twitter released its initial public offering (IPO) priced at $26 per share.

When the day ended, it was priced at $44.90, reportedly making about 1600 people into millionaires in a single
day.

[20]

At the time it was considered a successful IPO. Four years later, Twitter is trading at around $18 per

share. Why do you think that occurred? Is Twitter profitable? How can you find out?
TP5.

14.2 Research online to find a company that bought back shares of its own stock (treasury stock)

within the last 6–12 months. Why did it repurchase the shares? What happened to the company’s stock price
immediately after the repurchase and in the months since then? Is there any reason to think the repurchase
impacted the price?
TP6.

14.3 As a bakery business continues to grow, cash flow has become more of a concern. The board of

directors would like to maintain the market share price, so a discussion ensues about issuing a stock dividend
versus a cash dividend. As a newly appointed board member you listen to the conversation and need to cast
your vote. Which do you vote for: stock dividend or cash dividend?
TP7.

14.3 Use the internet to find a company that declared a stock split within the last 1–2 years. Why did it

declare the split? What happened to the company’s stock price immediately after the split and in the months
since then? Is there any reason to think the split impacted the price?
TP8.

14.4 Use the internet to find a publicly-held company’s annual report. Locate the section reporting

Stockholder’s Equity. Assume that you work for a consulting firm that has recently taken on this firm as a
client, and it is your job to brief your boss on the financial health of the company. Write a short memo noting
what insights you gather by looking at the Stockholder’s Equity section of the financial reports.
TP9.

14.4 Use the internet to find a publicly-held company’s annual report. Locate the section that

comments on the Stockholder’s Equity section of the financial reports. What additional insights are you able to
learn by looking further into the commentary? Is there anything that surprised you or that you think is missing
and could help you if you were deciding whether to invest $100,000 of your savings in this company’s stock?

20 Julie Bort. “Twitter’s IPO Created 1,600 New Millionaires and a $2.2 Billion Tax Bill, Analyst Says.” Business Insider. November 11, 2013.
http://www.businessinsider.com/twitter-ipo-created-1600-millionaires-2013-11

924

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 14 Corporation Accounting

15

Partnership Accounting
Figure 15.1 Partnership. Dale, Ciara, and Remi discuss operations of a landscape architecture company and
need to decide on a business model. Should they choose a partnership? (credit: modification of “Business
Meeting Architect” by “889520”/Pixabay, CC0)

Chapter Outline
15.1 Describe the Advantages and Disadvantages of Organizing as a Partnership
15.2 Describe How a Partnership Is Created, Including the Associated Journal Entries
15.3 Compute and Allocate Partners’ Share of Income and Loss
15.4 Prepare Journal Entries to Record the Admission and Withdrawal of a Partner
15.5 Discuss and Record Entries for the Dissolution of a Partnership

Why It Matters
As a recent graduate of a landscape architecture program, Ciara is ready to start her professional career. Dale,
her friend from high school, has started a small lawn mowing and hardscape business and wants to expand
his services. Ciara and Dale sit down and work out that if they combine their talents, they will be able to take
advantage of a growing need in their local housing market. They agree to form a partnership, and together
they decide what each person will contribute to the business. Ciara has committed to invest cash, and Dale will
contribute assets he has acquired in his business. In addition to the assets that each will provide, Ciara will
contribute her expertise in landscape design, while Dale will contribute his experience in property
maintenance and stonework/wood design and construction.
They set out on their adventure, creating a partnership agreement and detailing the roles each will play in this
newly created partnership. At first, business is great and they work well together. There is one problem: they
have more business than they can handle, and they are getting requests for services they currently don’t
provide. However, Ciara’s friend Remi is a pond installer. From speaking with Remi, she knows he is very

926

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

dedicated and has a vast customer base. She realizes that if he joins the partnership, the company can handle
all the business demand better. Therefore, Ciara and Dale decide to amend the partnership agreement and
admit Remi as a new one-third partner.
15.1

Describe the Advantages and Disadvantages of Organizing as a

Partnership
A partnership is legal business structure consisting of an association of two or more people who contribute
money, property, or services to operate as co-owners of a business. When discussing partnerships as a form of
business ownership, the term person can refer to individuals, corporations, or even other partnerships.
However, in this chapter, all the partners are individuals.

THINK IT THROUGH
Choosing a Partner
In some ways, a partnership is like a marriage; choosing a partner requires a great deal of thought. How
do you know whether you and your potential partner or partners will be a good fit? A strong partnership
agreement is one way to help settle future disagreements.
But before you get that far, it is really important to take a hard look at future partners. How do they deal
with stressful situations? What skills and assets do they possess that you do not, and vice versa? What
work ethic do they exemplify? Do they procrastinate? Are they planners? Do they get along with others?
Do the two of you work well with each other?
All these questions and many more should be explored before choosing business partners. While you
cannot predict the future or see all possible issues, doing your due diligence will help.
What other questions can you think of that would help you decide whether someone will be a good
business partner for you?

Characteristics of a Partnership
Just like a corporation, a partnership is a legal entity. It can own property and can be held legally liable for its
actions. It is a separate entity from its owners, the partners. Partnerships have several distinct characteristics
that set them apart from other entity types. The most common characteristics of a partnership are the
following:
• Formation by agreement. A partnership is formed by voluntary membership or association. The
partners must have an agreement about who contributes assets or services, who performs what
functions of the business, and how profits and losses and any additional compensation are shared.
Ideally, this agreement should be in writing; however, if not, the Uniform Partnership Act or the Revised
Uniform Partnership Act (RUPA) governs in areas of disagreement, depending on the state in which the
partnership is located.
• Defined or limited life. Typically, the life term of the partnership is established by agreement. Unlike
corporations, which have an unlimited life, partnerships end when a new partner is accepted or a partner
leaves (and a new partnership may be created), or the partnership dissolves.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

927

• Mutual agency. In a partnership, partners are considered agents of the entity. Mutual agency give each
partner the ability to act as an agent for the partnership in dealing with outside entities such as vendors
and lenders. The partnership is then bound by the actions of each partner acting within the scope of
partnership activities.
• Unlimited liability. Due to mutual agency, any partner has the ability to incur debt for the partnership.
Regardless of who negotiated the debt, each partner is liable to pay it if the debt was incurred to further
partnership activities. There are exceptions to this, but only for partners who meet limited partnership
standards (which you will learn about later in this chapter). If you are considered a general partner, you
are liable for the business’s debt.
• Non-taxable income at partnership level. The net income of a partnership is not subject to federal
taxation at the partnership level, despite the company’s being a separate legal entity from its partners.
Instead, its income or loss is allocated among the partners based upon the partnership agreement and
tax legislation, and the allocation is reported on each partner’s Tax Form K-1. The tax information on each
partner’s K-1 is then incorporated into each partner’s individual tax return, and tax is paid at each
individual partner’s relevant tax rate.
Income tax is levied on the partners regardless of how much of that taxable income is actually withdrawn
by the partner in a given year. For example, assume that a partner earned $20,000 in taxable income from
a partnership in 2019 and withdrew $25,000 as a draw. The partner’s taxable income from the partnership
for the year is $20,000. Draws are not considered taxable income. Instead, they are withdrawals from a
partner’s capital account. However, the $25,000 draw in this example reduces the partner’s capital
account by $25,000.
• Co-ownership of property. In a partnership, assets are jointly owned by all partners. If a dissolution
occurs, each partner retains a claim on the total assets proportional to that partner’s equity in the
organization. The rule presented herein does not apply to specific assets.
• Limited capital investment. Unlike a corporation, which is able to raise capital investments by issuing
stock, partners do not have the ability to raise capital except by incurring additional debt or agreeing to
contribute more of their personal assets. This limits the partnerships’ ability for rapid expansion.
• Participation in both income and loss. The net income or loss of the partnership is distributed as
specified in the partnership agreement. If the arrangement is not specified in the partnership agreement,
all partners participate equally in net income or losses.

IFRS CONNECTION
Partnerships and IFRS
You’ve learned how partnerships are formed, and you will soon learn how partnership capital and
income can be allocated and what happens to the capital structure when a partner is added or
subtracted. But how does a partnership account for normal day-to-day business transactions?
Partnership organizations can be very small, very large, or any size in between. What type of accounting
rules do partnerships use to record their daily business activities? Partnerships can choose among
various forms of accounting. The options broadly include using a cash basis, a tax basis, and a full accrual
basis to track transactions. When choosing to use the full accrual basis of accounting, partnerships apply
U.S. GAAP rules in their accounting processes. But you may be surprised to learn that some non-publicly

928

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

traded partnerships in the United States can use IFRS, or a simpler form of IFRS known as IFRS for Small
and Medium Sized Entities (SMEs). In 2008, the AICPA designated IFRS and IFRS for SMEs as acceptable
sets of generally accepted accounting principles. However, it is up to each State Board of Accountancy to
determine whether that state will allow the use of IFRS or IFRS for SMEs by non-public entities
incorporated in that state.
Despite the use of size descriptors in the title, qualifying as a small- or medium-sized entity has nothing
to do with size. A SME is any entity that publishes general purpose financial statements for public use but
does not have public accountability. In other words, the entity is not publicly traded. In addition, the
entity, even if it is a partnership, cannot act as a fiduciary; for example, it cannot be a bank or insurance
company and use SME rules.
Why might a partnership want to use IFRS for SMEs? First, IFRS for SMEs contains fewer and simpler
standards. IFRS for SMEs is only about 300 pages in length, whereas regular IFRS is over 2,500 pages long
and U.S. GAAP is over 25,000 pages. Second, IFRS for SMEs is modified only every three years, whereas
U.S. GAAP and IFRS are modified more frequently. This means entities using IFRS for SMEs don’t have to
adjust their accounting systems and reporting to new standards as frequently. Finally, if a partnership
transacts business with international businesses or hopes to attract international partners, seek capital
from international sources, or be bought out by an international company, having its financial
statements in IFRS form can make these transactions easier.

Advantages of Organizing as a Partnership
When it comes to choosing a legal structure or form for your business, the most common options are sole
proprietorships, partnerships, and different forms of corporations, each with advantages and disadvantages.
Partnerships have several advantages over other forms of business entities, as follows:
• Exemption from taxation at the partnership level. A significant advantage to forming a partnership is
the exemption from taxation as a business entity. In other words, although the individual partners are
taxed at the individual level, the partnership itself (as a business unit) is not subject to income tax. The tax
characteristics of a partnership “flow through” to the individual partners.
• Ease and lower cost of formation. Most business regulations tend to be written for corporations, which
is to be expected given the complexities of many such companies. Partnerships, on the other hand, are
simpler and have to comply with fewer regulations. Also, without shareholders, partnerships have fewer
reporting requirements. The partnership formation paperwork also tends to be less cumbersome than
that for other entities in most states. Overall, partnerships are simple to form, alter, and terminate.
• Combined skills and financial resources. Combining business acumen and financial assets can give a
partnership an advantage over sole proprietorships.
• Flexibility in managing and running the business. Partnerships are often simpler to manage and run
than other business structures (except for most sole proprietorships), and they can offer more
management flexibility as well if the partners generally agree on management issues. Since there is no
board of directors overseeing operations, partnerships can be nimble and make speedy changes—again,
as long as the partners agree.
• Easily changed business structure. It is a relatively easy process to convert a partnership to a
corporation in the future. With no shareholders to consider, a partnership’s capital can be converted to
shares of common stock.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

929

• Informality. Unlike publicly traded corporations, partnerships do not need to prepare articles of
incorporation, write bylaws, issue stock certificates to owners, document minutes or board meetings, pay
incorporation fees to states, or file quarterly financial statements with the SEC. However, it is advised that
partners create a written document detailing decision on issues such as profit sharing, dispute resolution
procedures, partnership changes, and other terms that the partners might agree upon to prevent future
complications.

YOUR TURN
All in the Family
Family partnerships are frequently utilized to allow family members to pool resources for investment
purposes and to transfer assets in a tax-efficient manner. In what ways can you imagine using a family
partnership?
Solution
Cash can be combined to purchase income-producing properties or other investments without having to
sell assets, thus keeping costly investments all in the family. Through a family partnership, it becomes
possible for those in high net worth tax brackets to transfer assets and wealth to younger generations in
a way that reduces potential estate and gift taxes. For example, a family partnership can be formed by a
grandparent who owns an apartment building. Children and grandchildren can be partners to share in
profits of the building. As they earn the income from the building while living, this can be a very tax
efficient way to transfer wealth.

Disadvantages of Organizing as a Partnership
While partnerships carry some clear advantages, there are also several disadvantages to consider. For
example, due to unlimited liability, each partner in a general partnership is equally and personally liable for all
the debts of the partnership. Following are some of the disadvantages of the partnership form of business
organization:
• Difficulty of ownership transfer. Since a partnership dissolves when there is a change in ownership, it
tends to be difficult to transfer ownership. It is a complicated process when a new partner is added or a
partnership interest is sold, requiring asset valuation and negotiation of previously agreed upon
partnership operating terms.
• Relative lack of regulation. You learned, for example, that a partnership’s informal agreement not need
be in writing. But this could lead to legal disputes between partners and expose them to unlimited
liability, something individuals in corporations do not need to worry about (they are liable only for the
amount of their investment in the corporation’s stock).
• Taxation subject to individual’s tax rate. Individual partners often have other sources of income
outside the partnership; this can make their allocated partnership income taxable at a higher rate than if
the partnership were liable for the income taxes instead.
• Limited life. The partnership ends when a new partner is accepted into the partnership, a partner leaves,
a partner dies, or the partnership dissolves. Therefore, most partnerships tend to have limited lives.

930

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

• Unlimited liability. Unlimited liability is the legal obligation of all general partners for the partnership’s
debts regardless of which partner incurred them. This liability can extend to the partners’ personal assets.
• Mutual agency and partnership disagreements. Mutual agency is the right of all partners to represent
the business and bind the partnership to contracts and agreements. This rule applies regardless of
whether all the partners agree with the contract or agreement. Mutual agency could cause tension
among the partners, since any of them can bind the partnership and make everyone liable as long as the
action is taken in the interest of furthering the partnership.
• Limited ability to raise capital. A partnership is often limited in its ability to raise capital or additional
funds, whether from the individual partners themselves or from a financial institution making a loan.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Sports Memorabilia Store
Farah and David decide to form a sports memorabilia retail partnership. They have known each other
since business graduate school and have always worked well together on various projects. The business
is doing well but cash flow is very tight. Farah takes several calls from vendors asking for payment. He
believed David had been paying the bills. When he asks about this, David admits to embezzling from the
partnership. What liability does Farah face as a result of the theft?

Table 15.1 summarizes some of the main advantages and disadvantages of the partnership form of business
organization.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Forming a Partnership
Potential Advantages

Potential Disadvantages

• No taxation at the partnership level

• Difficulty of ownership transfer

• Ease and lower cost of formation

• Relative lack of oversight/regulation

• Combined skills and financial resources

• Number of partners needed

• Flexibility in managing and running the

• Taxation subject to individual’s tax rate

business

• Limited life

• Easily changed business structure

• Unlimited liability

• Informality

• Mutual agency and potential for partnership
disagreements
• Limited ability to raise capital

Table 15.1

Types of Partnerships
A general partnership is an association in which each partner is personally liable to the partnership’s
creditors if the partnership has insufficient assets to pay its creditors. These partners are often referred to as
general partners. A limited partnership (LP) is an association in which at least one partner is a general

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

931

partner but the remaining partners can be limited partners, which means they are liable only for their own
investment in the firm if the partnership cannot pay its creditors. Thus, their personal assets are not at risk.
Finally, the third type is a limited liability partnership (LLP), which provides all partners with limited personal
liability against another partner’s obligations. Limited liability is a form of legal liability in which a partner’s
obligation to creditors is limited to his or her capital contributions to the firm. These types of partnerships
include “LLP” or partnership in their names and are usually formed by professional groups such as lawyers
and accountants. Each partner is at risk however, for his or her own negligence and wrongdoing as well as the
negligence and wrongdoing of those who are under the partners’ control or direction. Table 15.2 summarizes
the advantages and disadvantages of different types of partnerships.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Types of Partnerships
Type of partnership
General partnership

Advantages
Business is simple to form

Disadvantages
All partners have personal
liability

Limited partnership (LP)

Limited partners have limited liability

General partners are
personally liable

Limited liability

Partners are protected from other partners’

Some partners remain

partnership (LLP)

malpractice

personally liable

Table 15.2

LINK TO LEARNING
Arthur Andersen was one of the “Big 5” accounting firms until it was implicated in the Enron scandal.
Arthur Andersen had been formed as an LLP. Read this CNN Money article about the Arthur Andersen
case (https://openstax.org/l/50AACaseLiable) to see how courts can hold partners liable.

Dissolution of a Partnership
Dissolution occurs when a partner withdraws (due to illness or any other reason), a partner dies, a new
partner is admitted, or the business declares bankruptcy. Whenever there is a change in partners for any
reason, the partnership must be dissolved and a new agreement must be reached. This does not preclude the
partnership from continuing business operations; it only changes the document underlying the business. In
some cases, the new partnership may also require the revaluation of partnerships assets and, possibly, their
sale. Ideally, the partnership agreement has been written to address dissolution.

932

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

15.2

Describe How a Partnership Is Created, Including the Associated

Journal Entries
After examining all the relevant factors, Dale and Ciara decide to create their landscaping partnership. After
much discussion, they agree on the name Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes. The first step is to formally document the
actual partnership agreement. While a handshake would work, it is far more sensible to document it in case of
disagreement.

Creation of a Partnership
Ideally, the agreement to form a partnership should be in the form of a written contract. This partnership
agreement details the partners’ roles, the way profits and losses are shared, and the contributions each
partner makes to the partnership. It also should contain basic information such as the business’s name, its
location, its purpose or mission, the names of the partners, and the date of inception. Even more importantly,
it should outline the following information. There is no legal requirement for a written partnership agreement.
In fact, individuals can end up in court after forming a partnership agreement by accident with no written
documentation. It is strongly suggested that any business relationship has a written agreement. A properly
drafted agreement will often contain the following details:
• capital contributions of each partner
• allocation of profit, losses, and draws (withdrawals) among the partners
• partners’ authority and decision-making role
• process for change in partners
• process for partnership dissolutions
• process for settling disputes
The partners should also consider the following items:
• Name of the partnership. The business needs a name. Many partnerships are named for the partners or
the location, or the partners can choose and register an invented name. In many situations, if you are
using an invented name you must file a Doing Business As (DBA) statement with the appropriate
governmental agency.
• Contributions to the partnership. Important to the start of any business is finding the capital and
equipment with which to begin. The partners should agree up front about what each partner will
contribute, how the contribution will be recorded, and how the investment will affect each partner’s share
of ownership. For example, it is common for a partnership to allocate an ownership interest to a partner
who has valuable experience or contacts in an area of interest to a partnership. Partners can also
contribute service to the partnership rather than assets. Failure to address these details can derail a
business before it even starts.
• Partners’ authority. As you’ve learned, mutual agency can allow every partner to bind the partnership in
agreements with outside vendors or lenders. If the authority of each partner has not been documented,
problems can arise. Thus, it is important to outline who is responsible for what. The same goes for
decision making. A strong agreement will outline how decision are made and at what thresholds all the
partners need to be involved. A final point to cover is how management responsibilities will be divided up.
• Allocation of profits, losses, and draws. How will the partners share in the profits or losses of the
partnership? Will any of the partners receive a guaranteed payment (salary)? If so, how much? Each
partner is going to have different needs and requirements, and these should be agreed upon to avoid

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

933

dispute.
• Change in Partners. At some point there may be a change in partners – whether it is an addition or a
withdrawal. A well-drafted partnership agreement will create rules for how that can happen.
• Dispute resolution. Selecting a means to resolve conflicts may one may be the most important choices
for the new partners to make. It is human nature to disagree; the partnership agreement should cover
how disputes will be handled so they do not interrupt business in the future.
Once the partnership agreement is complete, there are other steps to take to create the business as a legal
entity.
1. Select the state in which you plan to operate. Typically, partnerships choose the state in which they are
located. Since the partnership does not pay taxes and regulations are limited, state selection is not as
important as it is for a corporation.
2. Register the name with the authorities required by the state in which the partnership is formed. This
allows the partnership to use the name and prevents others from selecting it.
3. Obtain the required business licenses. If your partnership will be selling items subject to sales tax, you will
need to obtain a sales tax license. If you are operating as a professional services firm, there may be state
licensing requirements – attorneys, physicians, and certified public accountants (CPAs) are especially
subject to license requirements.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Ethical Obligations to Partners
Recall that each partner is jointly and severally liable for all the debts of the partnership, meaning each
partner is personally liable for these obligations. As a result, in most business settings and jurisdictions,
the actions of any partner are attributed to the partnership and each of its partners, whether the actions
were approved by all partners or not. For example, if partner A signs a loan agreement on behalf of the
partnership and the partnership defaults on the loan, partner B can be personally liable for the loan,
even though this partner had no role in signing the initial agreement.
Due to this unlimited liability, whether there is a written partnership agreement or not, partners have an
ethical duty to act in the best interests of the partnership and of each of their partners. This is generally
called a fiduciary duty. A fiduciary is someone who has a legal and/or ethical obligation to act in the best
interest of others in order to maintain a relationship of trust and confidence. What this means in practice
is that partners are to avoid actual and potential conflicts of interests, and there is to be no self-dealing.
Partners are expected to put the partnership’s interest ahead of their own.

Formation of the Partnership
Each partner’s initial contribution is recorded on the partnership’s books. These contributions are recorded at
the fair value of the asset at the date of transfer. All partners must agree to the valuation being recorded.
As an example, let’s go back to Dale and Ciara. On January 1, 2019 they combined their resources into a
general partnership named Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes. They agree to a 50:50 split of income and losses. As

934

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

stated earlier, Ciara will invest cash and Dale has real assets to contribute to the partnership.
Dale’s contributed assets include lawn equipment that he bought or created based on his specific needs. The
equipment had a book value (determined in the process of filing Dale’s past individual income taxes) of $5,600
and a fair market value (the current price at which it would sell) of $6,400. He also contributed accounts
receivable from his business with a book value of $2,000. However, he expects to collect only $1,600 of it, so he
is contributing accounts receivable with a market value of $1,600. Since Ciara contributed cash of $8,000 and
no other assets, her contribution has a book value and a fair market value of $8,000 (Figure 15.2).
Note this point about the formation of a partnership when its assets’ fair market value differs from their book
value: it wouldn’t make sense to base the value of the capital contribution of assets (or liabilities) on their book
value. To see why, consider the equipment and accounts receivable contributions made by Dale. The
equipment had a book value of $5,600 and a fair value of $6,400. Why should Dale get credit for a contribution
of only the $5,600 book value when he could have sold the equipment for $6,400 and contributed $6,400 in
cash, instead of the equipment with a fair value of $6,400?
The same principle applies to Dale’s Accounts Receivable but in the opposite direction. Dale is contributing
Accounts Receivable with a book value of $2,000, but since the partnership expects to collect only $1,600, that
is the amount of capital contribution credit he will receive.

Figure 15.2

Assets Invested by Partners at Book Value and Fair Value. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The journal entries would be as follows:

When used fixed assets are contributed, depreciation is calculated based on their fair value and the
partnership’s estimate of their useful life. Fixed assets are contributed at their fair value, not the book value on
the partner’s individual books before the formation of the partnership. (In our examples, assume all the
partners were sole proprietors before the formation of the partnership.)
Likewise, if the partnership were to assume liabilities from one of the partners, the liability would be recorded
at the current value. And, as demonstrated above, any non-cash assets contributed to the partnership should
be valued at their current values.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

15.3

935

Compute and Allocate Partners’ Share of Income and Loss

The landscaping partnership is going well and has realized increases in the number of jobs performed as well
as in the partnership’s earnings. At the end of the year, the partners meet to review the income and expenses.
Once that has been done, they need to allocate the profit or loss based upon their agreement.

Allocation of Income and Loss
Just like sole proprietorships, partnerships make four entries to close the books at the end of the year. The
entries for a partnership are:
1. Debit each revenue account and credit the income section account for total revenue.
2. Credit each expense account and debit the income section account for total expenses.
3. If the partnership had income, debit the income section for its balance and credit each partner’s capital
account based on his or her share of the income. If the partnership realized a loss, credit the income
section and debit each partner’s capital account based on his or her share of the loss.
4. Credit each partner’s drawing account and debit each partner’s capital account for the balance in that
same partner’s drawing account.
The first two entries are the same as for a proprietorship. Both revenue and expense accounts are temporary
accounts. The last two entries are different because there is more than one equity account and more than one
drawing account. Capital accounts are equity accounts for each partner that track all activities, such as profit
sharing, reductions due to distributions, and contributions by partners to the partnership. Capital accounts are
permanent while drawing accounts must be zeroed out for each accounting period.
By December 31 at the end of the first year, the partnership realized net income of $50,000. Since Dale and
Ciara had agreed to a 50:50 split in their partnership agreement, each partner will record an increase to their
capital accounts of $25,000. The journal records the entries to allocate year end net income to the partner
capital accounts.

Income Allocations
Not every partnership allocates profit and losses on an even basis. As you’ve learned, the partnership
agreement should delineate how the partners will share net income and net losses. The partnership needs to
find a methodology that is fair and will equitably reflect each partner’s service and financial commitment to
the partnership. The following are examples of typical ways to allocate income:
1. A fixed ratio where income is allocated in the same way every period. The ratio can be expressed as a
percentage (80% and 20%), a proportion (7:3) or a fraction (1/4, 3/4).
2. A ratio based on beginning-of-year capital balances, end-of-year capital balances, or an average capital

936

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

balance during the year.
3. Partners may receive a guaranteed salary, and the remaining profit or loss is allocated on a fixed ratio.
4. Income can be allocated based on the proportion of interest in the capital account. If one partner has a
capital account that equates to 75% of capital, that partner would take 75% of the income.
5. Some combination of all or some of the above methods.
A fixed ratio is the easiest approach because it is the most straightforward. As an example, assume that Jeffers
and Singh are partners. Each contributed the same amount of capital. However, Jeffers works full time for the
partnership and Singh works part time. As a result, the partners agree to a fixed ratio of 0.75:0.25 to share the
net income.
Selecting a ratio based on capital balances may be the most logical basis when the capital investment is the
most important factor to a partnership. These types of ratios are also appropriate when the partners hire
managers to run the partnership in their place and do not take an active role in daily operations. The last three
approaches on the list recognize differences among partners based upon factors such as time spent on the
business or funds invested in it.
Salaries and interest paid to partners are considered expenses of the partnership and therefore deducted
prior to income distribution. Partners are not considered employees or creditors of the partnership, but these
transactions affect their capital accounts and the net income of the partnership.
Let’s return to the partnership with Dale and Ciara to see how income and salaries can affect the split of net
income (Figure 15.3). Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes reports net income of $68,000. The partnership agreement
has defined an income sharing ratio, which provides for salaries of $15,000 to Dale and $10,000 to Ciara. They
will share in the net income on a 50:50 basis. The calculation for income sharing between the partners is as
follows:

Figure 15.3

Income Allocation for Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
Now, consider the same scenario for Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes, but instead of net income, they realize a net
loss of $32,000. The salaries for Dale and Ciara remain the same. Also, the distribution process for allocating a
loss is the same as the allocation process for distributing a gain, as demonstrated above. The partners will
share in the net loss on a 50:50 basis. The calculation for the sharing of the loss between the partners is shown
in Figure 15.4

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

Figure 15.4

Loss sharing Allocation for Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Spidell and Diaz: A Partnership
For several years, Theo Spidell has operated a consulting company as a sole proprietor. On January 1,
2017 he formed a partnership with Juanita Diaz called Insect Management.
The facts are as follows:
• Spidell was to transfer the cash, accounts receivable, furniture and equipment, and all the liabilities
of the sole proprietorship in return for 60% of the partnership capital.
• The fair market value in the relevant accounts of the sole proprietorship at the close of business on
December 31, 2016 are shown in Figure 15.5.

Figure 15.5

Fair Market Values of Sole Proprietorship. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
• In exchange for 40% of the partnership, Diaz will invest $130,667 in cash.
• Each partner will be paid a salary – Spidell $3,000 per month and Diaz $2,000 per month.
• The partnership’s net income for 2016 was $300,000. The partnership agreement dictates an
income-sharing ratio.
• Assume that all allocations are 60% Spidell and 40% Diaz.
Record the following transactions as journal entries in the partnership’s records.
A. Receipt of assets and liabilities from Spidell
B. Investment of cash by Diaz
C. Profit or loss allocation including salary allowances and the closing balance in the Income Section
account

937

938

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

THINK IT THROUGH
Sharing Profits and Losses in a Partnership
Michael Wingra has operated a very successful hair salon for the past 7 years. It is almost too successful
because Michael does not have any free time. One of his best customers, Jesse Tyree, would like to get
involved, and they have had several conversations about forming a partnership. They have asked you to
provide some guidance about how to share in the profits and losses.
Michael plans to contribute the assets from his salon, which have been appraised at $500,000.
Jesse will invest cash of $300,000. Michael will work full time at the salon and Jesse will work part time.
Assume the salon will earn a profit of $120,000.
Instructions:
1. What division of profits would you recommend to Michael and Jesse?
2. Using your recommendation, prepare a schedule sharing the net income.

15.4

Prepare Journal Entries to Record the Admission and Withdrawal of a

Partner
So far we have demonstrated how to create a partnership, distribute the income or loss, and calculate income
distributed at the end of the year after salaries have been paid. Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes has been doing well,
but what if the opportunity arises to add another partner to handle more business? Or what happens if one
partner wants to leave the partnership or sell his or her interest to someone else? This section will discuss
those situations.

Admission of New Partner
There are two ways for a new partner to join a partnership. In both, a new partnership agreement should be
drawn up because the existing partnership will come to an end.
1. The new partner can invest cash or other assets into an existing partnership while the current partners
remain in the partnership.
2. The new partner can purchase all or part of the interest of a current partner, making payment directly to
the partner and not to the partnership. If the new partner buys an existing partner’s entire interest, the
existing partner leaves the partnership.
The new partner’s investment, share of ownership capital, and share of the net income or loss are all
negotiated in the process of developing the new partnership agreement. Based on how a partner is admitted,
oftentimes the admission can create a situation to be illustrated called a bonus to those in the partnership. A
bonus is the difference between the value of a partner’s capital account and the cash payment made at the
time of that partner’s or another partner’s withdrawal.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

939

Admission of New Partner—No Bonus
Whenever a new partner is admitted to the partnership, a new capital account must be opened for him or her.
This will allow the partnership to reflect the new members of the partnership.
The purchase of an existing partner’s ownership by a new partner is a personal transaction that involves the
existing partner and the new partner without otherwise affecting the records of the partnership. Accounting
for this method is very straightforward. The only changes that are recorded on the partnership’s books occur
in the two partners’ capital accounts. The existing partner’s capital account is debited and, after being created,
the new partner’s capital account is credited.
To illustrate, Dale decides to sell his interest in Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes to Remi. Since this is a personal
transaction, the only entry Acorn needs to make is to record the transfer of partner interest from Dale to Remi
on its books.

No other entry needs to be made. Note that the entry is a paper transfer—it is to move the balance in the
capital account. The amount paid by Remi to Dale does not affect this entry.
If instead the new partner invests directly into the partnership, the change increases the assets of the
partnership as well as the capital accounts. Suppose that, instead of buying Dale’s interest, Remi will join Dale
and Ciara in the partnership. The following journal entry will be made to record the admission of Remi as a
partner in Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes.

Admission of New Partner—Bonus to Old Partners
A bonus to the old partners can come about when the new partner’s investment in the partnership creates an
inequity in the capital of the new partnership, such as when a new partner’s capital account is not
proportionate to that of a previous partner. Because a change in ownership of a partnership produces a new
partnership agreement, a bonus may be used to record the change in the ownership capital to prevent
inequities among the partners.
A bonus to the old partner or partners increases (or credits) their capital balances. The amount of the increase
depends on the income ratio before the new partner’s admission.
As an illustration, Remi is a skilled machine operator who will aid Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes in the building of
larger projects. Assume the following information (Figure 15.6) for the partnership on the day Remi becomes a
partner.

940

Figure 15.6

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

Breakdown of Allocation of Bonus to Old Partners. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
To allocate the $10,000 bonus to the old partners, Dale and Ciara, make the following calculations:

Dale: ⎛⎝$10,000 × 50%⎞⎠ = $5,000
Ciara: ⎛⎝$10,000 × 50%⎞⎠ = $5,000
The journal entry to record Remi’s admission to the partnership and the allocation of the bonus to Dale and
Ciara is as shown.

Admission of New Partner—Bonus to New Partner
When the new partner’s investment may be less than his or her capital credit, a bonus to the new partner may
be considered. Sometimes the partnership is more interested in the skills the new partner possesses than in
any assets brought to the business. For instance, the new partner may have expertise in a particular field that
would be beneficial to the partnership, or the new partner may be famous and can draw attention to the
partnership as a result. This frequently happens with restaurants; many are named after sports celebrity
partners. A bonus to a newly admitted partner can also occur when the book values of assets currently on the
partnership’s books have a higher value than their fair market values.
A bonus to a new admitted partner decreases (or debits) the capital balances of the old partners. The amount
of the decrease depends on the income ratio defined by the old partnership agreement in place before the
new partner’s admission.
In our landscaping business example, suppose Remi receives a bonus based on his skills as a machine
operator. Assume the following information (Figure 15.7) for the partnership on the day he becomes a partner.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

Figure 15.7

941

Breakdown of Allocation of Bonus to New Partner. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,

OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
To allocate the $10,000 bonus that each of the old partners will contribute to the new partner, Remi, make the
following calculations.

Dale: ⎛⎝$10,000 × 50%⎞⎠ = $5,000
Ciara: ⎛⎝$10,000 × 50%⎞⎠ = $5,000
The journal entry to record Remi’s admission and the payment of his bonus in the partnership records is as
follows:

Withdrawal of Partner
Now, let’s explore the opposite situation—when a partner withdraws from a partnership. Partners may
withdraw by selling their equity in the business, through retirement, or upon death. The withdrawal of a
partner, just like the admission of a new partner, dissolves the partnership, and a new agreement must be
reached. As with a new partner, only the economic effect of the change in ownership is reflected on the books.
When existing partners buy out a retiring partner, the case is the opposite of admitting a new partner, but the
transaction is similar. The existing partners use personal assets to acquire the withdrawing partner’s equity
and, as a result, the partnership’s assets are not affected. The only effect in the partnership’s records is the
change in capital accounts. For example, assume that, after much discussion, Dale is ready to retire. Each
partner has capital account balances of $60,000. Ciara and Remi agree to pay Dale $30,000 each to close out
his partnership account. To record the withdrawal of Dale from the partnership, the journal entry is as follows:

Note that there is no change to the net assets of Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes—only a change in the capital

942

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

accounts. Ciara and Remi now have to create a new partnership agreement to reflect their new situation.

Partnership Buys Out Withdrawing Partner
When a partnership buys out a withdrawing partner, the terms of the buy-out should follow the partnership
agreement. Using partnership assets to pay for a withdrawing partner is the opposite of having a new partner
invest in the partnership. In accounting for the withdrawal by payment from partnership assets, the
partnership should consider the difference, if any, between the agreed-upon buy-out dollar amount and the
balance in the withdrawing partner’s capital account. That difference is a bonus to the retiring partner.
This situation occurs when:
1. The partnership’s fair market value of assets exceeds the book value.
2. Goodwill resulting from the partnership has not been accounted for.
3. The remaining partners urgently want the withdrawing partner to exit or want to show their appreciation
of the partner’s contributions.
The partnership debits (or reduces) the bonus from the remaining partners’ capital balances on the basis of
their income ratio at the time of the buy-out. To illustrate, Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes is appreciative of the hard
work that Dale has put into its success and would like to pay him a bonus. Dale, Ciara, and Remi each have
capital account balances of $60,000 at the time of Dale’s retirement. Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes intends to pay
Dale $80,000 for his interest. Ciara and Remi will do this as follows:
1. Calculate the amount of the bonus. This is done by subtracting Dale’s capital account balance from the
cash payment: ($80,000 – $60,000) = $20,000.
2. Allocate the cost of the bonus to the remaining partners on the basis of their income ratio. This
calculation comes to $10,000 each for Ciara and Remi ($20,000 × 50%).
The journal entry to record Dale’s retirement from the partnership and the bonus payment to reflect his
withdrawal is as shown:

In some cases, the retiring partner may give a bonus to the remaining partners. This can happen when:
1. Recorded assets are overvalued.
2. The partnership is not performing well.
3. The partner urgently wants to leave the partnership
In these cases, the cash paid by the partnership to the retiring partner is less than the balance in his or her
capital account. As a result, the other partners receive a bonus to their capital accounts based on the incomesharing ratio established prior to the withdrawal.
As an example, each of three partners of Acorn Lawn & Hardscapes has a capital balance of $60,000. Dale has
another opportunity and is eager to move on. He is willing to accept $50,000 cash in order to retire. The
difference between this cash amount and Dale’s capital account is a bonus to the remaining partners. The

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

943

bonus will be allocated to Ciara and Remi based on the income ratio at the time of Dale’s departure.
The journal entry to record Dale’s withdrawal and the bonus to Ciara and Remi is as shown:

When a partner passes away, the partnership dissolves. Most partnership agreements have provisions for the
surviving partners to continue operating the partnership. Typically, a valuation is performed at the date of
death, and the remaining partners settle with the deceased partner’s estate either directly with cash or
through distribution of the partnership’s assets.

15.5

Discuss and Record Entries for the Dissolution of a Partnership

Partnerships dissolve. Sometime the decision is made to close the business. Sometimes there is a bankruptcy.
Partner negligence, retirement, death, poor cash flow, and change in business practices are just some of the
reasons for closing down.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Ethical Partnership Dissolution
In most dissolutions of a partnership, the business partners need to decide what will happen to the
partnership itself. A partnership may be dissolved, but that may not end business operations. If the
partnership’s business operations are to continue, the partnership must decide what to do with its
customers or clients, particularly those primarily served by a partner leaving the business. An ethical
partnership will notify its customers and clients of the change and whether and how the partnership is
going to continue as a business under a new partnership agreement. Partners who are unable to agree
on how to notify their customers and clients should look to the Uniform Partnership Act, Article 8, which
outlines the general obligations and duties of partners when a partnership is dissolved.
A partner’s duties and obligation upon dissolution describe what the departing partner owes to the
partnership and the other partners in duties of loyalty and care, which are the basic fiduciary duties of a
partner prior to dissolution, as outlined in Section 409 of the Uniform Partnership Act. The one change
upon dissolution is that “each partner’s duty not to compete ends when the partnership dissolves.” The
Act states that “the dissolution of a partnership is the change in the relation of the partners caused by
any partner ceasing to be associated in the carrying on as distinguished from the winding up of the
business.”

[1]

This may not terminate the partnership’s business operations, but the partner’s obligations

under the dissolved partnership agreement will end, regardless of how the remaining partners create a

944

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

new partnership.
The departure or removal of a partner or partners and the resulting creation of a new partnership may
be tricky, because all original partners owe each other the duty of fairness and loyalty until the
dissolution has been completed. All the partners, departing or otherwise, are required to behave in a
fashion that does not hurt business operations and avoid putting their individual interests ahead of the
interests of the soon-to-be-dissolved partnership. Once the partnership has been dissolved, the
departing partners no longer have an obligation to their old business partners.

Fundamentals of Partnership Dissolution
The liquidation or dissolution process for partnerships is similar to the liquidation process for corporations.
Over a period of time, the partnership’s non-cash assets are converted to cash, creditors are paid to the extent
possible, and remaining funds, if any, are distributed to the partners. Partnership liquidations differ from
corporate liquidations in some respects, however:
1. General partners, as you may recall, have unlimited liability. Any general partner may be asked to
contribute additional funds to the partnership if its assets are insufficient to satisfy creditors’ claims.
2. If a general partner does not make good on his or her deficit capital balance, the remaining partners
must absorb that deficit balance. Absorption of the partner’s deficit balance gives the absorbing partner
legal recourse against the deficit partner.

Recording the Dissolution Process
As discussed above, the liquidation or dissolution of a partnership is synonymous with closing the business.
This may occur due to mutual partner agreement to sell the business, the death of a partner, or bankruptcy.
Before proceeding with liquidation, the partnership should complete the accounting cycle for its final
operational period. This will require closing the books with only balance sheet accounts remaining. Once that
process has been completed, four steps remain in the accounting for the liquidation, each requiring an
accounting entry. They are:
• Step 1: Sell noncash assets for cash and recognize a gain or loss on realization. Realization is the sale of
noncash assets for cash.
• Step 2: Allocate the gain or loss from realization to the partners based on their income ratios.
• Step 3: Pay partnership liabilities in cash.
• Step 4: Distribute any remaining cash to the partners on the basis of their capital balances.
These steps must be performed in sequence. Partnerships must pay creditors prior to distributing funds to
partners. At liquidation, some partners may have a deficiency in their capital accounts, or a debit balance.
Let’s consider an example. Football Partnership is liquidated; its balance sheet after closing the books is
shown in Figure 15.8.

1 Uniform Law Commission. Uniform Partnership Act (1997) (Last Amended 2013). https://www.uniformlaws.org/viewdocument/final-act-withcomments-118?CommunityKey=52456941-7883-47a5-91b6-d2f086d0bb44&tab=librarydocuments

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

Figure 15.8

945

Balance Sheet for Football Partnership. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under

CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license)
The partners of Football Partnership agree to liquidate the partnership on the following terms:
1. All the partnership assets will be sold to Hockey Partnership for $60,000 cash.
2. The partnership will satisfy the liabilities.
3. The income ratio will be 3:2:1 to partners Raven, Brown, and Eagle respectively. (Another way of saying
this is 3/6:2/6:1/6.)
4. The remaining cash will be distributed to the partners based on their capital account basis.
The journal entry to record the sale of assets to Hockey Partnership (Step 1) is as shown:

The journal entry to allocate the gain on realization among the partners’ capital accounts in the income ratio
of 3:2:1 to Raven, Brown, and Eagle, respectively (Step 2), is as shown:

946

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

The journal entry for Football Partnership to pay off the liabilities (Step 3) is as shown:

The journal entry to distribute the remaining cash to the partners based on their capital account basis (Step 4)
is as shown:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

947

Key Terms
bonus difference between the value of a partner’s capital account and the cash payment made at the time of
that partner’s or another partner’s withdrawal
capital account equity account for each partner that tracks all activities such as profit sharing, reductions
due to distributions, and contributions by partners to partnership
dissolution closing down of a partnership for economic, personal, or other reasons that may be unique to
the particular partnership
general partnership partnership in which each partner is personally liable to the partnership’s creditors if
the partnership has insufficient assets to pay its creditors
limited liability form of legal liability in which a partner’s obligation to creditors is limited to his or her
capital contributions to the firm
limited liability partnership (LLP) partnership that provides all partners with limited personal liability
against all other partners’ obligations
limited partnership (LP) partnership in which at least one partner is a general partner but the remaining
partners can be limited partners, which means they are liable only for their own investment in the firm if
the partnership cannot pay its creditors; thus, their personal assets are not at risk
liquidation (also, dissolution) process of selling off non-cash assets
mutual agency ability of each partner to act as an agent of the partnership in dealing with persons outside
the partnership
partner individuals, corporations, and even other partnerships participating in a partnership entity
partnership legal business structure consisting of an association of two or more people who contribute
money, property, or services to operate as co-owners of a business
partnership agreement document that details the partners’ role, the way profits and loss are shared, and
the contributions each partner makes to the partnership
realization the sale of noncash assets for cash
unlimited liability form of legal liability in which general partners are liable for all business debts if the
business cannot meet its liabilities

Summary
15.1 Describe the Advantages and Disadvantages of Organizing as a Partnership
• There are many advantages and disadvantages of partnership as a form of business entity and they
should be carefully considered.
• The most significant advantage of partnerships is the exemption from tax at the business level. Partners
are taxed on their share of the profit or loss at their individual tax rates.
• Mutual agency and unlimited liability should be weighed against the tax benefits of partnership.
• There are other entity forms that have many of the characteristics of standard partnerships. These other
entity forms often share the legal liability protection of corporations, and the tax and personal benefits of
a partnership.
15.2 Describe How a Partnership Is Created, Including the Associated Journal Entries
• Partners must consider several factors when developing their partnership agreement, such as the
contributions and authority of each partner and a means to resolve disputes.
• Non-cash assets such as equipment and prepaid expenses should be recorded at current market values.

948

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

• Partners are sometimes given an ownership interest based on their expertise or experience instead of
any contributed assets.
• Liabilities assumed by the partnership should be recorded at their current value.
15.3 Compute and Allocate Partners’ Share of Income and Loss
• There are several different approaches to sharing the income or loss of a partnership, including fixed
ratios, capital account balances, and combinations of the two.
15.4 Prepare Journal Entries to Record the Admission and Withdrawal of a Partner
• There are two different methods for admitting a new partner to a partnership—direct investment to the
partnership (affects partnership assets) and transaction among partners (does not affect partnership
assets).
• There are two different methods for a partner to withdraw from a partnership—direct payment from the
partnership and direct payment from the partners.
15.5 Discuss and Record Entries for the Dissolution of a Partnership
• There are times, such as following bankruptcy, death, or retirement, when a partnership ceases
operation.
• The following four accounting steps must be taken, in order, to dissolve a partnership: sell noncash
assets; allocate any gain or loss on the sale based on the income-sharing ratio in the partnership
agreement; pay off liabilities; distribute any remaining cash to partners based on their capital account
balances.

Multiple Choice
1.

15.1 A partnership ________.
A.

has one owner

B.

can issue stock

C.

pays taxes on partnership income

D.

can have more than one general partner

2.

15.1 Any assets invested by a particular partner in a partnership ________.
A.

do not become a partnership asset but instead remain with the partner

B.

can be used only by the investing partner

C.

become the property of all the partners

D.

are the basis for all profit sharing

3.

15.1 Which of the following is a disadvantage of the partnership form of organization?
A.

limited life

B.

no taxation at the partnership level

C.

flexibility in business operations

D.

combining of financial resources

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

4.

949

15.1 Mutual agency is defined as:
A.

a mutual agreement

B.

the right of all partners to represent the company’s normal business operations

C.

a synonym for partnership

D.

a partnership between two partnerships

5.

15.2 Chani contributes equipment to a partnership that she purchased 2 years ago for $10,000. The

current book value is $7,500 and the market value is $9,000. At what value should the partnership record the
equipment?
A.

$10,000

B.

$9,000

C.

$7,500

D.

none of the above

6.

15.2 Juan contributes marketable securities to a partnership. The book value of the securities is $7,000

and they have a current market value of $10,000. What amount should the partnership record in Juan’s Capital
account due to this contribution?
A.

$10,000

B.

$7,000

C.

$3,000

D.

none of the above

7.

15.2 Which one of the following would not be considered in the development of a partnership

agreement?
A.

profit and loss levels

B.

processing disputes

C.

stock options

D.

asset contributions

8.

15.3 A well written partnership agreement should include each of the following except ________.
A.

how to settle disputes

B.

the name of the partnership

C.

division of responsibilities

D.

Partner’s individual tax rate

9.

15.3 What type of assets may a partner not contribute to a partnership?
A.

accounts receivable

B.

furniture

C.

equipment

D.

personal credit cards

10.

15.3 How does a newly formed partnership handle the contribution of previously depreciated assets?
A.

continues the depreciation life as if the owner had not changed

B.

starts over, using the contributed value as the new cost basis

C.

shortens the useful life of the asset per the partnership agreement

D.

does not depreciate the contributed asset

950

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

11.

15.4 Thandie and Marco are partners with capital balances of $60,000. They share profits and losses at

50% each. Chris contributes $30,000 to the partnership for a 1/3 share. What amount should the partnership
record as a bonus to Chris?
A.

$20,000

B.

$15,000

C.

$10.500

D.

$5,000

12.

15.4 Thandie and Marco are partners with capital balances of $60,000. They share profits and losses at

50%. Chris contributes $30,000 to the partnership for a 1/3 share. What amount should Thandie’s capital
balance in the partnership be?
A.

$60,000

B.

$50,000

C.

$45,000

D.

$30,000

13.

15.4 Thandie and Marco are partners with capital balances of $60,000. They share profits and losses at

50%. Chris contributes $90,000 to the partnership for a 1/3 share. What amount should the partnership record
as an individual bonus to each of the old partners?
A.

$10,000

B.

$7,000

C.

$3,000

D.

$20,000

14.

15.4 Thandie and Marco are partners with capital balances of $60,000. They share profits and losses at

50%. Chris contributes $60,000 to the partnership for a 1/3 share. What amount should the partnership record
as an individual bonus to each of the old partners?
A.

$10,000

B.

$7,000

C.

$0

D.

$5,000

15.

15.5 When a partnership dissolves, the first step in the dissolution process is to ________.
A.

allocate the gain or loss on sale based on income sharing ratio

B.

pay off liabilities

C.

sell noncash assets

D.

divide the remaining cash among the partners

16.

15.5 When a partnership dissolves, the last step in the dissolution process is to ________.
A.

allocate the gain or loss on sale based on income sharing ratio

B.

pay off liabilities

C.

sell noncash assets

D.

divide the remaining cash among the partners

17.

15.5 Prior to proceeding with the liquidation, the partnership should ________.
A.

prepare adjusting entries without closing

B.

complete the accounting cycle for final operational period

C.

prepare only closing entries

D.

complete financial statements only

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

951

Questions
1.

15.1 Does a partnership pay income tax?

2.

15.1 Can a partner’s personal assets in a limited liability partnership be at risk?

3.

15.2 Can a partnership assume liabilities as part of one of the partner’s contributions?

4.

15.2 Does each partner have to contribute an equal amount of assets in order to split profit and losses?

5.

15.3 What types of bases for dividing partnership net income or net loss are available?

6.

15.3 Angela and Agatha are partners in Double A Partners. When they withdraw cash for personal use,

how should that be recorded in the accounting records?
7.

15.3 On February 3, 2016 Sam Singh invested $90,000 cash for a 1/3 interest in a newly formed

partnership. Prepare the journal entry to record the transaction.
8.

15.5 Why do partnerships dissolve?

9.

15.5 What are the four steps involved in liquidating a partnership?

10.

15.5 When a partner withdraws from the firm, which accounts are affected?

11.

15.5 What is the first step in a partnership liquidation (termination and sale of assets)?

12.

15.5 When a partnership liquidates, do partners get paid first or do creditors get paid first?

13.

15.5 Coffee Partners decides to close due to the increased competition from the national chains. If after

liquidating the noncash assets there is not enough cash to cover accounts payable, what happens?

Exercise Set A
EA1.

15.2 On May 1, 2017, BJ and Paige formed a partnership. Each contributed assets with the following

agreed-upon valuations.

Prepare a separate journal entry to record each partner’s contributions.
EA2.

15.3 The partnership of Chase and Chloe shares profits and losses in a 70:30 ratio respectively after

Chloe receives a $10,000 salary. Prepare a schedule showing how the profit and loss should be divided,
assuming the profit or loss for the year is:
A.

$ 30,000

B.

$ 6,000

C.

($10,000)

952

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

EA3.

15.4 The partnership of Tasha and Bill shares profits and losses in a 50:50 ratio, and the partners have

capital balances of $45,000 each. Prepare a schedule showing how the bonus should be divided if Ashanti joins
the partnership with a $60,000 investment. The partner’s new agreement will share profit and loss in a 1:3
ratio.
EA4.

15.5 Cheese Partners has decided to close the store. At the date of closing, Cheese Partners had the

following account balances:

A competitor agrees to buy the inventory and store fixtures for $20,000. Prepare the journal entries detailing
the liquidation, assuming that partners Colette and Swarma are sharing profits on a 50:50 basis:

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

15.4 The partnership of Michelle, Amal, and Maureen has done well. The three partners have shared

profits and losses in a 1:3 ratio, with capital balances of $60,000 each. Maureen wants to retire and withdraw.
Prepare a schedule showing how the cost should be divided if Amal and Michelle decide to pay Maureen
$70,000 for retirement of her capital account and the new agreement will share profits and losses 50:50.

Problem Set A
PA1.

15.3 The partnership of Tatum and Brook shares profits and losses in a 60:40 ratio respectively after

Tatum receives a 10,000 salary and Brook receives a 15,000 salary. Prepare a schedule showing how the profit
and loss should be divided, assuming the profit or loss for the year is:
A.

$40,000

B.

$25,000

C.

($5,000)

In addition, show the resulting entries to each partner’s capital account. Tatum’s capital account balance is
$50,000 and Brook’s is $60,000.
PA2.

15.4 Arun and Margot want to admit Tammy as a third partner for their partnership. Their capital

balances prior to Tammy’s admission are $50,000 each. Prepare a schedule showing how the bonus should be
divided among the three, assuming the profit or loss agreement will be 1:3 once Tammy has been admitted
and her contribution is:
A.

$20,000

B.

$80,000

C.

$50,000.

In addition, show the resulting journal entries to each of the three partners’ capital accounts.
PA3.

15.5 When a partnership is liquidated, any gains or losses realized by the sale of noncash assets are

allocated to the partners based on their income sharing ratio. Why?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

953

Problem Set B

B

PB1.

15.3 The partnership of Magda and Sue shares profits and losses in a 50:50 ratio after Mary receives a

$7,000 salary and Sue receives a $6,500 salary. Prepare a schedule showing how the profit and loss should be
divided, assuming the profit or loss for the year is:
A.

$10,000

B.

$5,000

C.

($12,000)

In addition, show the resulting entries to each partner’s capital account.
PB2.

15.4 The partnership of Arun, Margot, and Tammy has been doing well. Arun wants to retire and move

to another state for a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. The partners’ capital balances prior to Arun’s retirement
are $60,000 each. Prepare a schedule showing how Arun’s withdrawal should be divided assuming his buyout
is:
A.

$70,000

B.

$45,000

C.

$60,000.

In addition, show the resulting entries to the capital accounts of each of the three.
PB3.

15.5 Match each of the following descriptions with the appropriate term related to partnership

accounting.
A. Each and every partner can enter into contracts on behalf of the

i. liquidation

partnership
B. The business ceases operations.

ii. capital deficiency

C. How partners share in income and loss

iii. admission of a new
partner

D. Adding a new partner by contributing cash

iv. mutual agency

E. A partner account with a debit balance

v. income sharing ratio

954

Chapter 15 Partnership Accounting

Thought Provokers
TP1.

15.1 While sole proprietorships and corporations are the most popular forms of business organization,

the limited liability company (LLC) is a close third. Limited liability companies are treated like partnerships in
the majority of situations. Why do you think LLCs are gaining in popularity?
TP2.

15.5 A partnership is thriving. The three partners get along well; they complement each other’s skill

sets and enjoy each other’s company. One of the partners, Melinda, begins to behave differently. She begins
coming to work late or not at all. On several occasions she is spotted leaving the hotel next door in the
afternoon. The other partners are concerned about the change in her behavior. They confront her and
Melinda denies that anything is different. She points out that her work is still getting done and that she wants
a little more flexibility in her hours. The other partners are not convinced and decide to terminate the
partnership agreement. Can the other partners break the agreement? What considerations must the partners
take into account?

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

16

Statement of Cash Flows
Figure 16.1 Cash. (credit: modification of “Money” by “Tax Credits”/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Chapter Outline
16.1 Explain the Purpose of the Statement of Cash Flows
16.2 Differentiate between Operating, Investing, and Financing Activities
16.3 Prepare the Statement of Cash Flows Using the Indirect Method
16.4 Prepare the Completed Statement of Cash Flows Using the Indirect Method
16.5 Use Information from the Statement of Cash Flows to Prepare Ratios to Assess Liquidity and
Solvency
16.6 Appendix: Prepare a Completed Statement of Cash Flows Using the Direct Method

Why It Matters
Most financial accounting processes focus on the accrual basis of accounting, which reflects revenue earned,
regardless of whether that revenue has been collected or not, and the related costs involved in producing that
revenue, whether those costs have been paid or not. Yet the single-minded focus on accrued revenues and
expenses, without consideration of the cash impact of these transactions, can jeopardize the ability of users of
the financial statements to make well-informed decisions. Some investors say that “cash is king,” meaning
that they think a company’s cash flow is more important than its net income in determining investment
opportunities. Companies go bankrupt because they run out of cash. Financial statement users should be able
to develop a picture of how well a company’s net income generates cash and the sources and uses of a
company’s cash. From the statement of cash flows, it becomes possible to reconcile income on the income
statement to the cash actually generated during the same period. Having cash alone is not important, but the
source and use of cash are also important, specifically where the cash is coming from. If the business is
generating cash from operations (selling products and services), that is positive. If the company only has cash

956

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

as it is taking out loans and selling assets, one must be careful in their analysis.

16.1

Explain the Purpose of the Statement of Cash Flows

The statement of cash flows is a financial statement listing the cash inflows and cash outflows for the
business for a period of time. Cash flow represents the cash receipts and cash disbursements as a result of
business activity. The statement of cash flows enables users of the financial statements to determine how well
a company’s income generates cash and to predict the potential of a company to generate cash in the future.
Accrual accounting creates timing differences between income statement accounts and cash. A revenue
transaction may be recorded in a different fiscal year than the year the cash related to that revenue is
received. One purpose of the statement of cash flows is that users of the financial statements can see the
amount of cash inflows and outflows during a year in addition to the amount of revenue and expense shown
on the income statement. This is important because cash flows often differ significantly from accrual basis net
income. For example, assume in 2019 that Amazon showed a loss of approximately $720 million, yet Amazon’s
cash balance increased by more than $91 million. Much of the change can be explained by timing differences
between income statement accounts and cash receipts and distributions.
A related use of the statement of cash flows is that it provides information about the quality of a company’s
net income. A company that has records that show significantly less cash inflow on the statement of cash flows
than the reported net income on the income statement could very well be reporting revenue for which cash
will never be received from the customer or underreporting expenses.
A third use of the statement of cash flows is that it provides information about a company’s sources and uses
of cash not related to the income statement. For example, assume in 2019 that Amazon spent $287 million on
purchasing fixed assets and almost $370 million acquiring other businesses. This indicated to financial
statement users that Amazon was expanding even as it was losing money. Investors must have thought that
spending was good news as Amazon was able to raise more than $1 billion in borrowings or stock issuances in
2019.

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Cash Flow Statement Reporting
US generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) has codified how cash flow statements are to be
presented to users of financial statements. This was codified in Topic 230: Statement of Cash Flows as
part of US GAAP.

[1]

Accountants in the United States should follow US GAAP. Accountants working

internationally must report in accordance with International Accounting Standard (IAS) 7 Statement of
Cash Flows.

[2]

The ethical accountant understands the users of a company’s financial statement and

properly prepares a Statement of Cash Flow. There is often more than one way that financial statements
can be presented, such as US GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). What if a
company under US GAAP showed reporting issues on their financial statements and switched to IFRS
where results looked better. Is this proper? Does this occur?

1 Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). “Statement of Cash Flows (Topic 230) Classification of Certain Cash Receipts and Cash
Payments.” An Amendment of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. August 2016. https://asc.fasb.org/imageRoot/55/95454355.pdf
2 International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). “IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows.” n.d. https://www.ifrs.org/issued-standards/list-ofstandards/ias-7-statement-of-cash-flows/

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

957

The statement of cash flows identifies the sources of cash as well as the uses of cash, for the period being
reported, which leads the user of the financial statement to the period’s net cash flows, which is a method
used to determine profitability by measuring the difference between an entity’s cash inflows and cash
outflows. The statement answers the following two questions: What are the sources of cash (where does the
cash come from)? What are the uses of cash (where does the cash go)? A positive net cash flow indicates an
increase in cash during the reporting period, whereas a negative net cash flow indicates a decrease in cash
during the reporting period. The statement of cash flows is also used as a predictive tool for external users of
the financial statements, for estimated future cash flows, based on cash flow results in the past.

LINK TO LEARNING
This video from Khan Academy explains cash flows (https://openstax.org/l/50CashFlowsVid) in a unique
way.

Approaches to Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows
The statement of cash flows can be prepared using the indirect approach or the direct approach. The indirect
method approach reconciles net income to cash flows by subtracting noncash expenses and adjusting for
changes in current assets and liabilities, which reflects timing differences between accrual-based net income
and cash flows. A noncash expense is an expense that reduces net income but is not associated with a cash
flow; the most common example is depreciation expense. The direct method lists net cash flows from
revenue and expenses, whereby accrual basis revenue and expenses are converted to cash basis collections
and payments. Because the vast majority of financial statements are presented using the indirect method, the
indirect approach will be demonstrated within the chapter, and the direct method will be demonstrated in
Appendix: Prepare a Completed Statement of Cash Flows Using the Direct Method.

LINK TO LEARNING
AccountingCoach (https://openstax.org/l/50AccountCoach) is a great resource for many accounting
topics, including cash flow issues.

16.2

Differentiate between Operating, Investing, and Financing Activities

The statement of cash flows presents sources and uses of cash in three distinct categories: cash flows from
operating activities, cash flows from investing activities, and cash flows from financing activities. Financial
statement users are able to assess a company’s strategy and ability to generate a profit and stay in business
by assessing how much a company relies on operating, investing, and financing activities to produce its cash
flows.

958

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

THINK IT THROUGH
Classification of Cash Flows Makes a Difference
Assume you are the chief financial officer of T-Shirt Pros, a small business that makes custom-printed Tshirts. While reviewing the financial statements that were prepared by company accountants, you
discover an error. During this period, the company had purchased a warehouse building, in exchange for
a $200,000 note payable. The company’s policy is to report noncash investing and financing activities in a
separate statement, after the presentation of the statement of cash flows. This noncash investing and
financing transaction was inadvertently included in both the financing section as a source of cash, and
the investing section as a use of cash.
T-Shirt Pros’ statement of cash flows, as it was prepared by the company accountants, reported the
following for the period, and had no other capital expenditures.

Because of the misplacement of the transaction, the calculation of free cash flow by outside analysts
could be affected significantly. Free cash flow is calculated as cash flow from operating activities, reduced
by capital expenditures, the value for which is normally obtained from the investing section of the
statement of cash flows. As their manager, would you treat the accountants’ error as a harmless
misclassification, or as a major blunder on their part? Explain.

Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities arise from the activities a business uses to produce net income. For
example, operating cash flows include cash sources from sales and cash used to purchase inventory and to
pay for operating expenses such as salaries and utilities. Operating cash flows also include cash flows from
interest and dividend revenue interest expense, and income tax.

Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash flows from investing activities are cash business transactions related to a business’ investments in
long-term assets. They can usually be identified from changes in the Fixed Assets section of the long-term
assets section of the balance sheet. Some examples of investing cash flows are payments for the purchase of
land, buildings, equipment, and other investment assets and cash receipts from the sale of land, buildings,
equipment, and other investment assets.

Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities are cash transactions related to the business raising money from debt or
stock, or repaying that debt. They can be identified from changes in long-term liabilities and equity. Examples
of financing cash flows include cash proceeds from issuance of debt instruments such as notes or bonds

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

959

payable, cash proceeds from issuance of capital stock, cash payments for dividend distributions, principal
repayment or redemption of notes or bonds payable, or purchase of treasury stock. Cash flows related to
changes in equity can be identified on the Statement of Stockholder’s Equity, and cash flows related to longterm liabilities can be identified by changes in long-term liabilities on the balance sheet.

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Can a Negative Be Positive?
Investors do not always take a negative cash flow as a negative. For example, assume in 2018 Amazon
showed a loss of $124 billion and a net cash outflow of $262 billion from investing activities. Yet during
the same year, Amazon was able to raise a net $254 billion through financing. Why would investors and
lenders be willing to place money with Amazon? For one thing, despite having a net loss, Amazon
produced $31 billion cash from operating activities. Much of this was through delaying payment on
inventories. Amazon’s accounts payable increased by $78 billion, while its inventory increased by $20
billion.
Another reason lenders and investors were willing to fund Amazon is that investing payments are often
signs of a company growing. Assume that in 2018 Amazon paid almost $50 billion to purchase fixed
assets and to acquire other businesses; this is a signal of a company that is growing. Lenders and
investors interpreted Amazon’s cash flows as evidence that Amazon would be able to produce positive
net income in the future. In fact, Amazon had net income of $19 billion in 2017. Furthermore, Amazon is
still showing growth through its statement of cash flows; it spent about $26 billion in fixed equipment
and acquisitions.

16.3

Prepare the Statement of Cash Flows Using the Indirect Method

The statement of cash flows is prepared by following these steps:
Step 1: Determine Net Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Using the indirect method, operating net cash flow is calculated as follows:
• Begin with net income from the income statement.
• Add back noncash expenses, such as depreciation, amortization, and depletion.
• Remove the effect of gains and/or losses from disposal of long-term assets, as cash from the disposal of
long-term assets is shown under investing cash flows.
• Adjust for changes in current assets and liabilities to remove accruals from operating activities.
Step 2: Determine Net Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Investing net cash flow includes cash received and cash paid relating to long-term assets.
Step 3: Present Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Financing net cash flow includes cash received and cash paid relating to long-term liabilities and equity.
Step 4: Reconcile Total Net Cash Flows to Change in Cash Balance during the Period
To reconcile beginning and ending cash balances:

960

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

• The net cash flows from the first three steps are combined to be total net cash flow.
• The beginning cash balance is presented from the prior year balance sheet.
• Total net cash flow added to the beginning cash balance equals the ending cash balance.
Step 5: Present Noncash Investing and Financing Transactions
Transactions that do not affect cash but do affect long-term assets, long-term debt, and/or equity are
disclosed, either as a notation at the bottom of the statement of cash flow, or in the notes to the financial
statements.
The remainder of this section demonstrates preparation of the statement of cash flows of the company whose
financial statements are shown in Figure 16.2, Figure 16.3, and Figure 16.4.

Figure 16.2

Comparative Balance Sheet. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-

SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Figure 16.3

Income Statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)
Additional Information:
1. Propensity Company sold land with an original cost of $10,000, for $14,800 cash.
2. A new parcel of land was purchased for $20,000, in exchange for a note payable.
3. Plant assets were purchased for $40,000 cash.
4. Propensity declared and paid a $440 cash dividend to shareholders.
5. Propensity issued common stock in exchange for $45,000 cash.

961

962

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Figure 16.4

Statement of Cash Flows. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA

4.0 license)

Prepare the Operating Activities Section of the Statement of Cash Flows Using the
Indirect Method
In the following sections, specific entries are explained to demonstrate the items that support the preparation
of the operating activities section of the Statement of Cash Flows (Indirect Method) for the Propensity
Company example financial statements.
• Begin with net income from the income statement.
• Add back noncash expenses, such as depreciation, amortization, and depletion.
• Reverse the effect of gains and/or losses from investing activities.
• Adjust for changes in current assets and liabilities, to reflect how those changes impact cash in a way that
is different than is reported in net income.0

Start with Net Income
The operating activities cash flow is based on the company’s net income, with adjustments for items that

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

963

affect cash differently than they affect net income. The net income on the Propensity Company income
statement for December 31, 2018, is $4,340. On Propensity’s statement of cash flows, this amount is shown in
the Cash Flows from Operating Activities section as Net Income.

Add Back Noncash Expenses
Net income includes deductions for noncash expenses. To reconcile net income to cash flow from operating
activities, these noncash items must be added back, because no cash was expended relating to that expense.
The sole noncash expense on Propensity Company’s income statement, which must be added back, is the
depreciation expense of $14,400. On Propensity’s statement of cash flows, this amount is shown in the Cash
Flows from Operating Activities section as an adjustment to reconcile net income to net cash flow from
operating activities.

Reverse the Effect of Gains and/or Losses
Gains and/or losses on the disposal of long-term assets are included in the calculation of net income, but cash
obtained from disposing of long-term assets is a cash flow from an investing activity. Because the disposition
gain or loss is not related to normal operations, the adjustment needed to arrive at cash flow from operating
activities is a reversal of any gains or losses that are included in the net income total. A gain is subtracted from
net income and a loss is added to net income to reconcile to cash from operating activities. Propensity’s
income statement for the year 2018 includes a gain on sale of land, in the amount of $4,800, so a reversal is
accomplished by subtracting the gain from net income. On Propensity’s statement of cash flows, this amount is
shown in the Cash Flows from Operating Activities section as Gain on Sale of Plant Assets.

Adjust for Changes in Current Assets and Liabilities
Because the Balance Sheet and Income Statement reflect the accrual basis of accounting, whereas the
statement of cash flows considers the incoming and outgoing cash transactions, there are continual
differences between (1) cash collected and paid and (2) reported revenue and expense on these statements.

964

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Changes in the various current assets and liabilities can be determined from analysis of the company’s
comparative balance sheet, which lists the current period and previous period balances for all assets and
liabilities. The following four possibilities offer explanations of the type of difference that might arise, and
demonstrate examples from Propensity Company’s statement of cash flows, which represent typical
differences that arise relating to these current assets and liabilities.

Increase in Noncash Current Assets
Increases in current assets indicate a decrease in cash, because either (1) cash was paid to generate another
current asset, such as inventory, or (2) revenue was accrued, but not yet collected, such as accounts receivable.
In the first scenario, the use of cash to increase the current assets is not reflected in the net income reported
on the income statement. In the second scenario, revenue is included in the net income on the income
statement, but the cash has not been received by the end of the period. In both cases, current assets
increased and net income was reported on the income statement greater than the actual net cash impact from
the related operating activities. To reconcile net income to cash flow from operating activities, subtract
increases in current assets.
Propensity Company had two instances of increases in current assets. One was an increase of $700 in prepaid
insurance, and the other was an increase of $2,500 in inventory. In both cases, the increases can be explained
as additional cash that was spent, but which was not reflected in the expenses reported on the income
statement.

Decrease in Noncash Current Assets
Decreases in current assets indicate lower net income compared to cash flows from (1) prepaid assets and (2)
accrued revenues. For decreases in prepaid assets, using up these assets shifts these costs that were recorded
as assets over to current period expenses that then reduce net income for the period. Cash was paid to obtain
the prepaid asset in a prior period. Thus, cash from operating activities must be increased to reflect the fact
that these expenses reduced net income on the income statement, but cash was not paid this period.
Secondarily, decreases in accrued revenue accounts indicates that cash was collected in the current period but
was recorded as revenue on a previous period’s income statement. In both scenarios, the net income reported
on the income statement was lower than the actual net cash effect of the transactions. To reconcile net income
to cash flow from operating activities, add decreases in current assets.
Propensity Company had a decrease of $4,500 in accounts receivable during the period, which normally results
only when customers pay the balance, they owe the company at a faster rate than they charge new account
balances. Thus, the decrease in receivable identifies that more cash was collected than was reported as
revenue on the income statement. Thus, an addback is necessary to calculate the cash flow from operating
activities.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

965

Current Operating Liability Increase
Increases in current liabilities indicate an increase in cash, since these liabilities generally represent (1)
expenses that have been accrued, but not yet paid, or (2) deferred revenues that have been collected, but not
yet recorded as revenue. In the case of accrued expenses, costs have been reported as expenses on the
income statement, whereas the deferred revenues would arise when cash was collected in advance, but the
revenue was not yet earned, so the payment would not be reflected on the income statement. In both cases,
these increases in current liabilities signify cash collections that exceed net income from related activities. To
reconcile net income to cash flow from operating activities, add increases in current liabilities.
Propensity Company had an increase in the current operating liability for salaries payable, in the amount of
$400. The payable arises, or increases, when an expense is recorded but the balance due is not paid at that
time. An increase in salaries payable therefore reflects the fact that salaries expenses on the income statement
are greater than the cash outgo relating to that expense. This means that net cash flow from operating is
greater than the reported net income, regarding this cost.

Current Operating Liability Decrease
Decreases in current liabilities indicate a decrease in cash relating to (1) accrued expenses, or (2) deferred
revenues. In the first instance, cash would have been expended to accomplish a decrease in liabilities arising
from accrued expenses, yet these cash payments would not be reflected in the net income on the income
statement. In the second instance, a decrease in deferred revenue means that some revenue would have been
reported on the income statement that was collected in a previous period. As a result, cash flows from
operating activities must be decreased by any reduction in current liabilities, to account for (1) cash payments
to creditors that are higher than the expense amounts on the income statement, or (2) amounts collected that
are lower than the amounts reflected as income on the income statement. To reconcile net income to cash
flow from operating activities, subtract decreases in current liabilities.
Propensity Company had a decrease of $1,800 in the current operating liability for accounts payable. The fact
that the payable decreased indicates that Propensity paid enough payments during the period to keep up with
new charges, and also to pay down on amounts payable from previous periods. Therefore, the company had
to have paid more in cash payments than the amounts shown as expense on the Income Statements, which
means net cash flow from operating activities is lower than the related net income.

966

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Analysis of Change in Cash
Although the net income reported on the income statement is an important tool for evaluating the success of
the company’s efforts for the current period and their viability for future periods, the practical effectiveness of
management is not adequately revealed by the net income alone. The net cash flows from operating activities
adds this essential facet of information to the analysis, by illuminating whether the company’s operating cash
sources were adequate to cover their operating cash uses. When combined with the cash flows produced by
investing and financing activities, the operating activity cash flow indicates the feasibility of continuance and
advancement of company plans.

Determining Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities (Indirect Method)
Net cash flow from operating activities is the net income of the company, adjusted to reflect the cash impact of
operating activities. Positive net cash flow generally indicates adequate cash flow margins exist to provide
continuity or ensure survival of the company. The magnitude of the net cash flow, if large, suggests a
comfortable cash flow cushion, while a smaller net cash flow would signify an uneasy comfort cash flow zone.
When a company’s net cash flow from operations reflects a substantial negative value, this indicates that the
company’s operations are not supporting themselves and could be a warning sign of possible impending
doom for the company. Alternatively, a small negative cash flow from operating might serve as an early
warning that allows management to make needed corrections, to ensure that cash sources are increased to
amounts in excess of cash uses, for future periods.
For Propensity Company, beginning with net income of $4,340, and reflecting adjustments of $9,500, delivers a
net cash flow from operating activities of $13,840.

Figure 16.5

Cash from Operating. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

YOUR TURN
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Assume you own a specialty bakery that makes gourmet cupcakes. Excerpts from your company’s
financial statements are shown.

How much cash flow from operating activities did your company generate?
Solution

THINK IT THROUGH
Explaining Changes in Cash Balance
Assume that you are the chief financial officer of a company that provides accounting services to small
businesses. You are called upon by the board of directors to explain why your cash balance did not
increase much from the beginning of 2018 until the end of 2018, since the company produced a
reasonably strong profit for the year, with a net income of $88,000. Further assume that there were no
investing or financing transactions, and no depreciation expense for 2018. What is your response?
Provide the calculations to back up your answer.

967

968

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Prepare the Investing and Financing Activities Sections of the Statement of Cash Flows
Preparation of the investing and financing sections of the statement of cash flows is an identical process for
both the direct and indirect methods, since only the technique used to arrive at net cash flow from operating
activities is affected by the choice of the direct or indirect approach. The following sections discuss specifics
regarding preparation of these two nonoperating sections, as well as notations about disclosure of long-term
noncash investing and/or financing activities. Changes in the various long-term assets, long-term liabilities,
and equity can be determined from analysis of the company’s comparative balance sheet, which lists the
current period and previous period balances for all assets and liabilities.

Investing Activities
Cash flows from investing activities always relate to long-term asset transactions and may involve increases or
decreases in cash relating to these transactions. The most common of these activities involve purchase or sale
of property, plant, and equipment, but other activities, such as those involving investment assets and notes
receivable, also represent cash flows from investing. Changes in long-term assets for the period can be
identified in the Noncurrent Assets section of the company’s comparative balance sheet, combined with any
related gain or loss that is included on the income statement.
In the Propensity Company example, the investing section included two transactions involving long-term
assets, one of which increased cash, while the other one decreased cash, for a total net cash flow from
investing of ($25,200). Analysis of Propensity Company’s comparative balance sheet revealed changes in land
and plant assets. Further investigation identified that the change in long-term assets arose from three
transactions:
1. Investing activity: A tract of land that had an original cost of $10,000 was sold for $14,800.
2. Investing activity: Plant assets were purchased, for $40,000 cash.
3. Noncash investing and financing activity: A new parcel of land was acquired, in exchange for a $20,000
note payable.
Details relating to the treatment of each of these transactions are provided in the following sections.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

969

Investing Activities Leading to an Increase in Cash
Increases in net cash flow from investing usually arise from the sale of long-term assets. The cash impact is
the cash proceeds received from the transaction, which is not the same amount as the gain or loss that is
reported on the income statement. Gain or loss is computed by subtracting the asset’s net book value from
the cash proceeds. Net book value is the asset’s original cost, less any related accumulated depreciation.
Propensity Company sold land, which was carried on the balance sheet at a net book value of $10,000,
representing the original purchase price of the land, in exchange for a cash payment of $14,800. The data set
explained these net book value and cash proceeds facts for Propensity Company. However, had these facts not
been stipulated in the data set, the cash proceeds could have been determined by adding the reported $4,800
gain on the sale to the $10,000 net book value of the asset given up, to arrive at cash proceeds from the sale.

Investing Activities Leading to a Decrease in Cash
Decreases in net cash flow from investing normally occur when long-term assets are purchased using cash.
For example, in the Propensity Company example, there was a decrease in cash for the period relating to a
simple purchase of new plant assets, in the amount of $40,000.

Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities always relate to either long-term debt or equity transactions and may
involve increases or decreases in cash relating to these transactions. Stockholders’ equity transactions, like
stock issuance, dividend payments, and treasury stock buybacks are very common financing activities. Debt
transactions, such as issuance of bonds payable or notes payable, and the related principal payback of them,
are also frequent financing events. Changes in long-term liabilities and equity for the period can be identified
in the Noncurrent Liabilities section and the Stockholders’ Equity section of the company’s Comparative
Balance Sheet, and in the retained earnings statement.

970

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

In the Propensity Company example, the financing section included three transactions. One long-term debt
transaction decreased cash. Two transactions related to equity, one of which increased cash, while the other
one decreased cash, for a total net cash flow from financing of $34,560. Analysis of Propensity Company’s
Comparative Balance Sheet revealed changes in notes payable and common stock, while the retained earnings
statement indicated that dividends were distributed to stockholders. Further investigation identified that the
change in long-term liabilities and equity arose from three transactions:
1. Financing activity: Principal payments of $10,000 were paid on notes payable.
2. Financing activity: New shares of common stock were issued, in the amount of $45,000.
3. Financing activity: Dividends of $440 were paid to shareholders.
Specifics about each of these three transactions are provided in the following sections.

Financing Activities Leading to an Increase in Cash
Increases in net cash flow from financing usually arise when the company issues share of stock, bonds, or
notes payable to raise capital for cash flow. Propensity Company had one example of an increase in cash flows,
from the issuance of common stock.

Financing Activities Leading to a Decrease in Cash
Decreases in net cash flow from financing normally occur when (1) long-term liabilities, such as notes payable
or bonds payable are repaid, (2) when the company reacquires some of its own stock (treasury stock), or (3)
when the company pays dividends to shareholders. In the case of Propensity Company, the decreases in cash
resulted from notes payable principal repayments and cash dividend payments.

Noncash Investing and Financing Activities
Sometimes transactions can be very important to the company, yet not involve any initial change to cash.
Disclosure of these noncash investing and financing transactions can be included in the notes to the financial
statements, or as a notation at the bottom of the statement of cash flows, after the entire statement has been
completed. These noncash activities usually involve one of the following scenarios:
• exchanges of long-term assets for long-term liabilities or equity, or
• exchanges of long-term liabilities for equity.
Propensity Company had a noncash investing and financing activity, involving the purchase of land (investing
activity) in exchange for a $20,000 note payable (financing activity).

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

971

Summary of Investing and Financing Transactions on the Cash Flow Statement
Investing and financing transactions are critical activities of business, and they often represent significant
amounts of company equity, either as sources or uses of cash. Common activities that must be reported as
investing activities are purchases of land, equipment, stocks, and bonds, while financing activities normally
relate to the company’s funding sources, namely, creditors and investors. These financing activities could
include transactions such as borrowing or repaying notes payable, issuing or retiring bonds payable, or
issuing stock or reacquiring treasury stock, to name a few instances.

YOUR TURN
Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Assume your specialty bakery makes gourmet cupcakes and has been operating out of rented facilities in
the past. You owned a piece of land that you had planned to someday use to build a sales storefront. This
year your company decided to sell the land and instead buy a building, resulting in the following
transactions.

What are the cash flows from investing activities relating to these transactions?
Solution

Note: Interest earned on investments is an operating activity.

16.4

Prepare the Completed Statement of Cash Flows Using the Indirect

Method
In this section, we use the example of Virtual Co. to work through the entire process of preparing the
company’s statement of cash flows using the indirect method. Virtual’s comparative balance sheet and income
statement are provided as a base for the preparation of the statement of cash flows.

972

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Review Problem: Preparing the Virtual Co. Statement of Cash Flows

Figure 16.6

Comparative Balance Sheet. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-

SA 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Figure 16.7

Income Statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

license)
Additional Information
The following additional information is provided:
1. Investments that originally cost $30,000 were sold for $47,500 cash.
2. Investments were purchased for $50,000 cash.
3. Plant assets were purchased for $66,000 cash.
4. Cash dividends were declared and paid to shareholders in the amount of $8,000.
Directions:
Prepare the statement of cash flows (indirect method), for the year ended December 31, 2018.

973

974

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Figure 16.8

Statement of Cash Flows. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA

4.0 license)

16.5

Use Information from the Statement of Cash Flows to Prepare Ratios to

Assess Liquidity and Solvency
Cash flow ratio analysis allows financial statement users to see the company’s liquidity position from a clearer
perspective. The ratios presented in this section focus on free cash flow, calculated as operating cash,
reduced by expected capital expenditures and by cash dividends payments. The free cash flow value is thus an
adaptation of cash flow from operating activities. The result obtained in the initial free cash flow calculation is
then used to calculate the free cash flow to sales ratio, which is the ratio of free cash flow to sales revenue,
and the free cash flow to assets ratio, which is the ratio of free cash flow to total assets. These three tools
give indicators about the company’s flexibility and agility, which equates to their ability to seize opportunities
in the future, as they arise.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

975

E T H I C A L C O N S I D E R AT I O N S
Cash Flow Analysis
Cash is required to pay the bills. All businesses need to have a clear picture of available cash so they can
plan and pay their bills. The statement of cash flows allows investors direct insight into the actual activity
on the company’s cash balances. Mark A. Siegel wrote in The CPA Journal that “as Wall Street analysts
have lost faith in earnings-based metrics in the wake of Enron, WorldCom, and others, many have
gravitated toward the cash flow statement. Companies are regularly evaluated on the basis of free cash
flow yield and other measures of cash generation.”

[3]

The operating cash flow ratio, and the cash flow

margin ratio, and the other cash flow–related metrics discussed allow an investor and other users of the
financial statements to analyze financial statement data to see a company’s ability to pay for current
debt and assess its operational cash flow to function as a going concern.

[4]

This helps investors and other

users of the financial statements ensure the veracity of a company’s financial statements and its ability
to pay its bills.

Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow calculations start with cash flows from operating activities, reduced by planned capital
expenditures and planned cash dividend payments. In the example case demonstrated, free cash flow would
be as follows:
Free cash flow calculation:

The absence of free cash flow is an indicator of severe liquidity concern for Propensity Company and could be
an early indicator that the company may not be able to continue operations. This could also be a one-time
occurrence, in a year where a large capital investment was planned, to be financed with resources from the
company’s capital reserves from previous years’ profits. In such a case, the negative free cash flow would not
be an issue of concern.

LINK TO LEARNING
This article by Investopedia presents information about how to use free cash flow (https://openstax.org/
l/50FreeCashFlow) to evaluate strengths of various businesses:

3 Marc A. Siegel. “Accounting Shenanigans on the Cash Flow Statement.” CPA Journal. March 2006. http://archives.cpajournal.com/2006/306/
essentials/p38.htm
4 Steven D. Jones. “Why Cash Flow Matters in Evaluating a Company.” The Wall Street Journal. August 11, 2016. https://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB997466275287616386. Miriam Gottfried. “Spoiler Alert for Netflix: Debt and Cash Flow Matter.” The Wall Street Journal. April 17, 2017.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/spoiler-alert-for-netflix-debt-and-cash-flow-matter-1492468397

976

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Cash Flows to Sales
The cash flows to sales ratio is computed by dividing free cash flow by sales revenue. In the Propensity
Company case, free cash flow had a negative outcome, so the calculation would not be useful in this case.

Cash Flows to Assets
The cash flows to assets ratio is computed by dividing free cash flow by total assets. Again, when the free cash
flow had a negative outcome, as it did in the Propensity Company example scenario, the calculation would not
be useful

CONCEPTS IN PRACTICE
Lehman Brothers: Would You Have Invested?
Between 2005 and 2007, Lehman Brothers (an investment bank) increased its net income from $3.1
billion to $4.1 billion. It received nearly $42 billion interest and dividends on its investments, a primary
part of its business model, in 2007 alone. It also had $7.2 billion available in cash at the end of 2007.
Would you be interested in investing in Lehman Brothers? However, Lehman Brothers went bankrupt in
September 2008; it was the biggest corporate bankruptcy in history. Could investors have known?
A clue would be its free cash ratio. Assuming that you would expect Lehman Brothers’ actual capital
expenditures and dividend payments from 2007 be expected in 2008, Lehman’s free cash ratio would be
calculated as, in millions:

Lehman Brothers invested heavily in securities created from subprime mortgages. When the subprime
mortgage market collapsed in 2008, Lehman Brothers was not able to generate enough cash to stay in
business. The large negative free cash flow gave warning that Lehman Brothers was a risky investment.

IFRS CONNECTION
Statement of Cash Flows
In every type of business across the globe, it is important to understand the business’s cash position.
Analyzing cash inflows and outflows, current cash flow, and cash flow trends, and predicting future cash
flows all importantly inform decision-making. The US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires
the statement of cash flows as the mechanism that allows users to better assess a company’s cash
position. US generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and International Financial Reporting

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

977

Standards (IFRS) set forth rules regarding the composition and presentation of the statement of cash
flows.
• Method: Both GAAP and IFRS recommend and encourage the direct method of preparing the
statement of cash flows but allow the indirect method. Under US GAAP, if the direct method is used,
a reconciliation between net income and operating income must also be presented. This
reconciliation is not required under IFRS.
• Presentation: The three categories—Cash Flows from Operating Activities, Cash Flows from
Investing Activities, and Cash Flows from Financing Activities—are required under both US GAAP and
IFRS. US GAAP requires the presentation of only one year of information, while IFRS requires two
years of data.
• Categorizing Transactions: IFRS is more flexible in where to present certain cash flow transactions
than is US GAAP. This flexibility occurs around interest, dividends, and taxes. As shown in Table 16.1,
US GAAP is more rigid in reporting.
Comparing GAAP and IFRS
US GAAP

IFRS

Interest paid

Operating

Operating or financing

Interest

Operating

Operating or investing

Dividends paid

Financing

Operating or financing

Dividends

Operating

Operating or investing

Operating

Usually operating but option to dissect tax into operating and

received

received
Taxes

financing components
Table 16.1
Understanding the impact of these potential differences is important. The statement of cash flows is
used not only to evaluate from where a company receives and spends its cash, but also to predict future
cash flows. The flexibility of these reporting items in the statement of cash flows can result in decreased
comparability between similar companies using different reporting methods. For example, Free Cash
Flow (Operating Cash Flows less Capital Expenditures), will have different results if interest and dividends
are classified in sections other than operating activities.
Let’s consider an example: World-Wide Co. is headquartered in London and currently reports under US
GAAP because it is traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). World-Wide is considering switching
to reporting under IFRS to make the company more comparable to its competitors, since most of them
use IFRS. World-Wide has the following information in the operating activities section of its most recent
statement of cash flows.

978

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

World-Wide had $1,000,000 in capital expenditures during the year, and they paid dividends of $80,000 to
shareholders.
Based on this information, World-Wide’s Free Cash Flow would be as follows:

or
$2,500,000 − $1,000,000 = $1,500,000
If World-Wide switches to IFRS reporting, it has determined that its cash interest payments would be
classified as financing activities because the payments are related to long-term debt. The interest
received is from a short-term receivable and thus will remain classified as an operating activity, but the
dividends received are from a long-term investment and will be reclassified to an investing activity. And,
$60,000 of the taxes have been identified as being associated with tax consequences of an investing
opportunity and therefore will be reclassified as an investing activity. With these reclassifications, the free
cash flow of World-Wide would be as follows:
FCF = ($2,500,000 + $200,000 − $50,000 + $60,000) − 1,000,000 = $1,710,000
The take-away from this example is that the flexibility afforded by IFRS can have an impact on
comparability between companies.
These, and other differences, between US GAAP and IFRS arise because of the more rules-based nature
of the standards put forth by FASB versus the more principles-based rules set forth by IASB. The IASB, in
creating IFRS standards, follows a substance-over-form viewpoint that allows firms more flexibility in
assessing the intent of transactions. Anytime more judgement is allowed and/or utilized, there must be
adequate disclosure to explain the chosen reporting methodology.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

16.6

979

Appendix: Prepare a Completed Statement of Cash Flows Using the

Direct Method

Figure 16.9

Statement of Cash Flows. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY-NC-SA

4.0 license)
As previously mentioned, the net cash flows for all sections of the statement of cash flows are identical when
using the direct method or the indirect method. The difference is just in the way that net cash flows from
operating activities are calculated and presented. The direct approach requires that each item of income and
expense be converted from the accrual basis value to the cash basis value for that item. This is accomplished
by adjusting the accrual amount for the revenue or expense by any related current operating asset or liability.
Revenue and expense items that are not related to those current asset and liability accounts would not need
an adjustment.
In the following section, we demonstrate the calculations needed to assess the component pieces of the
operating section using the direct approach.

980

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Cash Collected from Customers
Cash collected from customers is different from the sales revenue that is recorded on the accrual basis
financial statements. To reconcile the amount of sales revenue reported on the income statement to the cash
collected from sales, calculate the maximum amount of cash that could have been collected this period
(potential cash collected) by combining (a) the amount that was due from customers on the first day of the
period (beginning accounts receivable) and (b) total sales revenue recorded this period. If there were no
outstanding accounts receivable balance at the end of the period, then one could reasonably assume that this
total was collected in full during this period. Thus, the amount collected for sales can be determined by
subtracting the ending accounts receivable balance from the total potential cash that could have been
collected.

Cash Paid to Suppliers for Inventory
Cash paid for inventory is different from the cost of goods sold that is recorded on the accrual basis financial
statements. To reconcile the amount of cost of goods sold reported on the income statement to the cash paid
for inventory, it is necessary to perform two calculations. The first part of the calculation determines how
much inventory was purchased, and the second part of the calculation determines how much of those
purchases were paid for during the current period.
First, calculate the maximum amount of inventory that was available for sale this period by combining (a) the
amount of inventory that was on hand on the last day of the period (ending inventory) and (b) total cost of
goods sold recorded this period. If there were no inventory balance at the beginning of the period, then one
could reasonably assume that this total was purchased entirely during the current period. Thus, the amount of
inventory purchased this period can be determined by subtracting the beginning inventory balance from the
total goods (inventory) available for sale.
Second, calculate the maximum amount of cash that could have been paid for inventory this period (total
obligation to pay inventory costs) by combining (a) the amount that was due to suppliers on the first day of
the period (beginning accounts payable) and (b) total inventory purchases this period, from the first inventory
calculation. If there were no outstanding accounts payable balance at the end of the period, then one could
reasonably assume that this total was paid in full during this current period. Thus, the amount paid for
inventory can be determined by subtracting the ending accounts payable balance from the total obligation to
pay inventory costs that could have been paid. The final number of the second calculation is the actual cash
paid for inventory.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

981

Cash Paid for Salaries
Cash paid for salaries is different from the salaries expense that is recorded on the accrual basis financial
statements. To reconcile the amount of salaries expense reported on the income statement to the cash paid
for salaries, calculate the maximum amount of cash that could have been paid for salaries this period (total
obligation to pay salaries) by combining (a) the amount that was due to employees on the first day of the
period (beginning salaries payable) and (b) total salaries expense recorded this period. If there were no
outstanding salaries payable balance at the end of the period, then one could reasonably assume that this
total was paid in full during this current period. Thus, the amount paid for salaries can be determined by
subtracting the ending salaries payable balance from the total obligation to pay salaries that could have been
paid.

Cash Paid for Insurance
Cash paid for insurance is different from the insurance expense that is recorded on the accrual basis financial
statements. To reconcile the amount of insurance expense reported on the income statement to the cash paid
for insurance premiums, calculate the maximum amount of cash that could have been paid for insurance this
period (total insurance premiums expended) by combining (a) the amount of insurance premiums that were
prepaid on the last day of the period (ending prepaid insurance) and (b) total insurance expense recorded this
period. If there were no prepaid insurance balance at the beginning of the period, then one could reasonably
assume that this total was paid entirely during the current period. Thus, the amount paid for insurance this
period can be determined by subtracting the beginning prepaid insurance balance from the total insurance
premiums that had been recorded as expended.

982

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

983

Key Terms
cash flow cash receipts and cash disbursements as a result of business activity
direct method approach used to determine net cash flows from operating activities, whereby accrual basis
revenue and expenses are converted to cash basis collections and payments
financing activity cash business transaction reported on the statement of cash flows that obtains or retires
financing
free cash flow operating cash, reduced by expected capital expenditures and by cash dividends payments
free cash flow to assets ratio ratio of free cash flow to total assets
free cash flow to sales ratio ratio of free cash flow to sales revenue
indirect method approach used to determine net cash flows from operating activities, starting with net
income and adjusting for items that impact new income but do not require outlay of cash
investing activity cash business transaction reported on the statement of cash flows from the acquisition or
disposal of a long-term asset
net cash flow method used to determine profitability by measuring the difference between an entity’s cash
inflows and cash outflows
noncash expense expense that reduces net income but is not associated with a cash flow; most common
example is depreciation expense
operating activity cash business transaction reported on the statement of cash flows that relates to
ongoing day-to-day operations
statement of cash flows financial statement listing the cash inflows and cash outflows for the business for a
period of time

Summary
16.1 Explain the Purpose of the Statement of Cash Flows
• The statement of cash flows presents the sources and uses of cash.
• The statement of cash flows is used to predict future cash flows and to assess the quality of an entity’s
earnings.
• There are two approaches utilized to prepare the statement of cash flow: the indirect method and the
direct method.
16.2 Differentiate between Operating, Investing, and Financing Activities
• Transactions must be segregated into the three types of activities presented on the statement of cash
flows: operating, investing, and financing.
• Operating cash flows arise from the normal operations of producing income, such as cash receipts from
revenue and cash disbursements to pay for expenses.
• Investing cash flows arise from a company investing in or disposing of long-term assets.
• Financing cash flows arise from a company raising funds through debt or equity and repaying debt.
16.3 Prepare the Statement of Cash Flows Using the Indirect Method
• Preparing the operating section of statement of cash flows by the indirect method starts with net income
from the income statement and adjusts for items that affect cash flows differently than they affect net
income.
• Multiple levels of adjustments are required to reconcile accrual-based net income to cash flows from
operating activities.

984

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

• The investing section of statement of cash flows relates to changes in long-term assets.
• The financing section of statement of cash flows relates to changes in long-term liabilities and changes in
equity.
• Company activities that reflect changes in long-term assets, long-term liabilities, or equity, but have no
cash impact, require special reporting treatment, as noncash investing and financing transactions.
16.4 Prepare the Completed Statement of Cash Flows Using the Indirect Method
• Preparing the operating section of statement of cash flows by the indirect method starts with net income
from the income statement and adjusts for items that affect cash flows differently than they affect net
income.
• Multiple levels of adjustments are required to reconcile accrual-based net income to cash flows from
operating activities.
• The investing section of the statement of cash flows relates to changes in long-term assets.
• The financing section of statement of cash flows relates to changes in long-term liabilities and changes in
equity.
• Company activities that reflect changes in long-term assets, long-term liabilities, or equity, but have no
cash impact, require special reporting treatment, as noncash investing and financing transactions.
16.5 Use Information from the Statement of Cash Flows to Prepare Ratios to Assess Liquidity and
Solvency
• Free cash flow relates to the amount of expected cash from operations which is left over after planned
capital expenditures and dividends are paid.
• The cash flow to assets ratio correlates the company’s free cash flow to its total asset value.
• The cash flow to sales ratio considers free cash flow in relation to the company’s sales revenue.
16.6 Appendix: Prepare a Completed Statement of Cash Flows Using the Direct Method
• This section included an example of a statement of cash flows, prepared under the direct method, using
the continuing example for Propensity Company.
• The direct method of preparing the statement of cash flows is identical to the indirect method except for
the cash flows from the operating section.
• To complete the cash flows from operating activities, the direct method directly shows the cash collected
from customers from revenue activities and the cash spent on operations, rather than reconciling net
income to cash flows from operating activities as done using the indirect method. Calculating the
amounts directly collected from revenues and spent on expenditures involves calculating the cash effect
of the accrual amounts reported on the income statement.

Multiple Choice
1.

16.1 Which of the following statements is false?
A.

Noncash activities should be reported in accrual basis financial statements.

B.

Net cash flow from operating activities relates to normal business operations.

C.

Net income usually equals net cash flow from operating activities.

D.

The statement of cash flows is an essential part of the basic financial statements.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

2.

985

16.2 Which of these transactions would not be part of the cash flows from the operating activities section

of the statement of cash flows?
A.

credit purchase of inventory

B.

sales of product, for cash

C.

cash paid for purchase of equipment

D.

salary payments to employees

3.

16.2 Which is the proper order of the sections of the statement of cash flows?
A.

financing, investing, operating

B.

operating, investing, financing

C.

investing, operating, financing

D.

operating, financing, investing

4.

16.2 Which of these transactions would be part of the financing section?
A.

inventory purchased for cash

B.

sales of product, for cash

C.

cash paid for purchase of equipment

D.

dividend payments to shareholders, paid in cash

5.

16.2 Which of these transactions would be part of the operating section?
A.

land purchased, with note payable

B.

sales of product, for cash

C.

cash paid for purchase of equipment

D.

dividend payments to shareholders, paid in cash

6.

16.2 Which of these transactions would be part of the investing section?
A.

land purchased, with note payable

B.

sales of product, for cash

C.

cash paid for purchase of equipment

D.

dividend payments to shareholders, paid in cash

7.

16.3 What is the effect on cash when current noncash operating assets increase?
A.

Cash increases by the same amount.

B.

Cash decreases by the same amount.

C.

Cash decreases by twice as much.

D.

Cash does not change.

8.

16.3 What is the effect on cash when current liabilities increase?
A.

Cash increases by the same amount.

B.

Cash decreases by the same amount.

C.

Cash decreases by twice as much.

D.

Cash does not change.

9.

16.3 What is the effect on cash when current noncash operating assets decrease?
A.

Cash increases by the same amount.

B.

Cash decreases by the same amount.

C.

Cash decreases by twice as much.

D.

Cash does not change.

986

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

10.

16.3 What is the effect on cash when current liabilities decrease?
A.

Cash increases by the same amount.

B.

Cash decreases by the same amount.

C.

Cash decreases by twice as much.

D.

Cash does not change.

11.

16.3 Which of the following would trigger a subtraction in the indirect operating section?
A.

gain on sale of investments

B.

depreciation expense

C.

decrease in accounts receivable

D.

decrease in bonds payable

12.

16.3 Which of the following represents a source of cash in the investing section?
A.

sale of investments

B.

depreciation expense

C.

decrease in accounts receivable

D.

decrease in bonds payable

13.

16.3 Which of the following would be included in the financing section?
A.

loss on sale of investments

B.

depreciation expense

C.

increase in notes receivable

D.

decrease in notes payable

14.

16.4 If beginning cash equaled $10,000 and ending cash equals $19,000, which is true?
A.

Operating cash flow 9,000; Investing cash flow (3,500); Financing cash flow (2,500)

B.

Operating cash flow 4,500; Investing cash flow 9,000; Financing cash flow (4,500)

C.

Operating cash flow 2,000; Investing cash flow (13,000); Financing cash flow 2,000

D.

none of the above

15.

16.5 Which of the following is a stronger indicator of cash flow flexibility?
A.

cash flow from operating activities

B.

cash flow to sales ratio

C.

free cash flow

D.

all three indicate comparable degrees of flexibility

Questions
1.

16.1 What function does the statement of cash flows serve, as one of the four basic financial

statements?
2.

16.1 Is it possible for a company to have significant net income in the same time period that net cash

flows are negative? Explain.
3.

16.2 What categories of activities are reported on the statement of cash flows? Does it matter in what

order these sections are presented?
4.

16.2 Describe three examples of operating activities, and identify whether each of them represents cash

collected or cash spent.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

5.

987

16.2 Describe three examples of investing activities, and identify whether each of them represents cash

collected or cash spent.
6.

16.2 Describe three examples of financing activities, and identify whether each of them represents cash

collected or cash spent.
7.

16.3 Explain the difference between the two methods used to prepare the operating section of the

statement of cash flows. How do the results of these two approaches compare?
8.

16.3 Why is depreciation an addition in the operating section of the statement of cash flows, when

prepared by the indirect method?
9.

16.3 When preparing the operating section of the statement of cash flows, using the indirect method,

how must gains and losses be handled? Why?
10.

16.3 If a company reports a gain/(loss) from the sale of assets, as part of the net income on the income

statement, and the net book value of those assets on the date of the sale is known, can the amount of the cash
proceeds from the sale be determined? If so, how?
11.

16.3 Note payments reduce cash and are related to long-term debt. Do these facts automatically lead to

their inclusion as elements of the financing section of the statement of cash flows? Explain.
12.

16.4 Is there any significance that can be attributed to whether net cash flows are generated from

operating activities, versus investing and/or financing activities? Explain.
13.

16.4 Would there ever be activities that relate to operating, investing, or financing activities that would

not be reported in their respective sections of the statement of cash flows? Explain. If a company had any such
activities, how would they be reported in the financial statements, if at all?
14.

16.5 What insight does the calculation of free cash flow provide about the company’s cash flow

position?
15.

16.6 Why is using the direct method to prepare the operating section of the statement of cash flows

more challenging for accountants than preparing the balance sheet, income statement, and retained earnings
statement?

Exercise Set A
EA1.

16.1 Provide journal entries to record each of the following transactions. For each, identify whether

the transaction represents a source of cash (S), a use of cash (U), or neither (N).
A.

Declared and paid to shareholders, a dividend of $24,000.

B.

Issued common stock at par value for $12,000 cash.

C.

Sold a tract of land that had cost $10,000, for $16,000.

D.

Purchased a company truck, with a note payable of $38,000.

E.

Collected $8,000 from customer accounts receivable.

988

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

EA2.

16.2 In which section of the statement of cash flows would each of the following transactions be

included? For each, identify the appropriate section of the statement of cash flows as operating (O), investing
(I), financing (F), or none (N). (Note: some transactions might involve two sections.)
A.

paid advertising expense

B.

paid dividends to shareholders

C.

purchased business equipment

D.

sold merchandise to customers

E.

purchased plant assets

EA3.

16.2 In which section of the statement of cash flows would each of the following transactions be

included? For each, identify the appropriate section of the statement of cash flows as operating (O), investing
(I), financing (F), or none (N). (Note: some transactions might involve two sections.)
A.

borrowed from the bank for business loan

B.

declared dividends, to be paid next year

C.

purchased treasury stock

D.

purchased a two-year insurance policy

E.

purchased plant assets

EA4.

16.3 Use the following information from Albuquerque Company’s financial statements to determine

operating net cash flows (indirect method).

EA5.

16.3 What adjustment(s) should be made to reconcile net income to net cash flows from operating

activities (indirect method) considering the following balances in current assets?

EA6.

16.3 Use the following information from Birch Company’s balance sheets to determine net cash flows

from operating activities (indirect method), assuming net income for 2018 of $122,000.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

EA7.

989

16.3 Use the following information from Chocolate Company’s financial statements to determine

operating net cash flows (indirect method).

EA8.

16.3 Use the following information from Denmark Company’s financial statements to determine

operating net cash flows (indirect method).

EA9.

16.3 Use the following excerpts from Eagle Company’s financial records to determine net cash flows

from financing activities.

EA10.

16.3 Use the following excerpts from Fruitcake Company’s financial records to determine net cash

flows from investing activities.

EA11.

16.3 Use the following excerpts from Grenada Company’s financial records to determine net cash

flows from operating activities and net cash flows from investing activities.

EA12.

16.4 Provide the missing piece of information for the following statement of cash flows puzzle.

990

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

EA13.

16.4 Provide the missing piece of information for the following statement of cash flows puzzle.

EA14.

16.5 Use the following excerpts from Kirsten Company’s Statement of Cash Flows and other financial

records to determine the company’s free cash flow.

EA15.

16.5 Use the following excerpts from Franklin Company’s statement of cash flows and other financial

records to determine the company’s free cash flow for 2018 and 2017.

EA16.

16.5 The following are excerpts from Hamburg Company’s statement of cash flows and other

financial records.

Compute the following for the company:
A.

free cash flow

B.

cash flows to sales ratio

C.

cash flows to assets ratio

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

EA17.

991

16.6 Use the following excerpts from Algona Company’s financial statements to determine cash

received from customers in 2018.

EA18.

16.6 Use the following excerpts from Huckleberry Company’s financial statements to determine cash

paid to suppliers for inventory in 2018.

Exercise Set B

B

EB1.

16.1 Provide journal entries to record each of the following transactions. For each, identify whether

the transaction represents a source of cash (S), a use of cash (U), or neither (N).
A.

Paid $22,000 cash on bonds payable.

B.

Collected $12,600 cash for a note receivable.

C.

Declared a dividend to shareholders for $16,000, to be paid in the future.

D.

Paid $26,500 to suppliers for purchases on account.

E.

Purchased treasury stock for $18,000 cash.

EB2.

16.2 In which section of the statement of cash flows would each of the following transactions be

included? For each, identify the appropriate section of the statement of cash flows as operating (O), investing
(I), financing (F), or none (N). (Note: some transactions might involve two sections.)
A.

collected accounts receivable from customers

B.

issued common stock for cash

C.

declared and paid dividends

D.

paid accounts payable balance

E.

sold a long-term asset for the same amount as purchased

EB3.

16.2 In which section of the statement of cash flows would each of the following transactions be

included? For each, identify the appropriate section of the statement of cash flows as operating (O), investing
(I), financing (F), or none (N). (Note: some transactions might involve two sections.)
A.

purchased stock in Xerox Corporation

B.

purchased office supplies

C.

issued common stock

D.

sold plant assets for cash

E.

sold equipment for cash

992

EB4.

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

16.3 Use the following information from Hamlin Company’s financial statements to determine

operating net cash flows (indirect method).

EB5.

16.3 What adjustment(s) should be made to reconcile net income to net cash flows from operating

activities (indirect method) considering the following balances in current assets?

EB6.

16.3 Use the following excerpts from Indigo Company’s balance sheets to determine net cash flows

from operating activities (indirect method), assuming net income for 2018 of $225,000.

EB7.

16.3 Use the following information from Jumper Company’s financial statements to determine

operating net cash flows (indirect method).

EB8.

16.3 Use the following information from Kentucky Company’s financial statements to determine

operating net cash flows (indirect method).

EB9.

16.3 Use the following excerpts from Leopard Company’s financial records to determine net cash

flows from investing activities.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

EB10.

993

16.3 Use the following information from Manuscript Company’s financial records to determine net

cash flows from financing activities.

EB11.

16.3 Use the following excerpts from Nutmeg Company’s financial records to determine net cash

flows from operating activities and net cash flows from investing activities.

EB12.

16.4 Provide the missing piece of information for the following statement of cash flows puzzle.

EB13.

16.4 Provide the missing piece of information for the following statement of cash flows puzzle.

EB14.

16.5 Use the following excerpts from Indira Company’s Statement of Cash Flows and other financial

records to determine the company’s free cash flow.

EB15.

16.5 Use the following excerpts from Bolognese Company’s statement of cash flows and other

financial records to determine the company’s free cash flow for 2018 and 2017.

994

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

EB16.

16.5 The following shows excerpts from Camole Company’s statement of cash flows and other

financial records.

Compute the following for the company:
A.

free cash flow

B.

cash flows to sales ratio

C.

cash flows to assets ratio

EB17.

16.6 Use the following excerpts from Brownstone Company’s financial statements to determine cash

received from customers in 2018.

EB18.

16.6 Use the following excerpts from Jasper Company’s financial statements to determine cash paid

to suppliers for inventory in 2018.

Problem Set A
PA1.

16.2 Provide journal entries to record each of the following transactions. For each, also identify *the

appropriate section of the statement of cash flows, and **whether the transaction represents a source of cash
(S), a use of cash (U), or neither (N).
A.

paid $12,000 of accounts payable

B.

collected $6,000 from a customer

C.

issued common stock at par for $24,000 cash

D.

paid $6,000 cash dividend to shareholders

E.

sold products to customers for $15,000

F.

paid current month’s utility bill, $1,500

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

PA2.

16.3 Use the following information from Acorn Company’s financial statements to determine

operating net cash flows (indirect method).

PA3.

16.3 Use the following information from Berlin Company’s financial statements to prepare the

operating activities section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PA4.

16.3 Use the following information from Coconut Company’s financial statements to prepare the

operating activities section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

995

996

PA5.

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

16.3 Use the following information from Dubuque Company’s financial statements to prepare the

operating activities section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PA6.

16.3 Use the following information from Eiffel Company’s financial statements to prepare the

operating activities section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PA7.

16.3 Analysis of Forest Company’s accounts revealed the following activity for its Land account, with

descriptions added for clarity of analysis. How would these two transactions be reported for cash flow
purposes? Note the section of the statement of cash flow, if applicable, and if the transaction represents a
cash source, cash use, or noncash transaction.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

PA8.

997

16.4 Use the following excerpts from Zowleski Company’s financial information to prepare a

statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PA9.

16.4 Use the following excerpts from Yardley Company’s financial information to prepare a statement

of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

998

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

PA10.

16.4 Use the following excerpts from Wickham Company’s financial information to prepare a

statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PA11.

16.4 Use the following excerpts from Tungsten Company’s financial information to prepare a

statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PA12.

16.5 The following shows excerpts from financial information relating to Aspen Company and

Bergamot Company.

Compute the following for both companies. Compare your results.
A.

free cash flow

B.

cash flows to sales ratio

C.

cash flows to assets ratio

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

PA13.

16.6 Use the following excerpts from Fromera Company’s financial information to prepare the

operating section of the statement of cash flows (direct method) for the year 2018.

PA14.

16.6 Use the following excerpts from Victrolia Company’s financial information to prepare a

statement of cash flows (direct method) for the year 2018.

999

1000

PA15.

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

16.6 Use the following cash transactions relating to Lucknow Company to determine the cash flows

from operating, using the direct method.

Problem Set B

B

PB1.

16.2 Provide journal entries to record each of the following transactions. For each, also identify: *the

appropriate section of the statement of cash flows, and **whether the transaction represents a source of cash
(S), a use of cash (U), or neither (N).
A.

reacquired $30,000 treasury stock

B.

purchased inventory for $20,000

C.

issued common stock of $40,000 at par

D.

purchased land for $25,000

E.

collected $22,000 from customers for accounts receivable

F.

paid $33,000 principal payment toward note payable to bank

PB2.

16.3 Use the following information from Grenada Company’s financial statements to prepare the

operating activities section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

PB3.

16.3 Use the following information from Honolulu Company’s financial statements to prepare the

operating activities section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PB4.

16.3 Use the following information from Isthmus Company’s financial statements to prepare the

operating activities section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PB5.

16.3 Use the following information from Juniper Company’s financial statements to prepare the

operating activities section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

1001

1002

PB6.

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

16.3 Use the following excerpts from Kayak Company’s financial information to prepare the operating

section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PB7.

16.3 Analysis of Longmind Company’s accounts revealed the following activity for Equipment, with

descriptions added for clarity of analysis. How would these two transactions be reported for cash flow
purposes? Note the section of the statement of cash flow, if applicable, and if the transaction represents a
cash source, cash use, or noncash transaction.

Equipment
Account balance, beginning of year

$ 88,000

• Purchase of equipment this year, for cash

29,500

• Purchase of equipment this year, with note payable

34,750

Account balance, end of year

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

152,250

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

PB8.

16.4 Use the following excerpts from Stern Company’s financial information to prepare a statement of

cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PB9.

1003

16.4 Use the following excerpts from Unigen Company’s financial information to prepare the

operating section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

1004

PB10.

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

16.4 Use the following excerpts from Mountain Company’s financial information to prepare a

statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PB11.

16.4 Use the following excerpts from OpenAir Company’s financial information to prepare a

statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

PB12.

16.5 The following shows excerpts from financial information relating to Stanwell Company and

Thodes Company.

Compute the following for both companies. Compare your results.
A.

free cash flow

B.

cash flows to sales ratio

C.

cash flows to assets ratio

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

PB13.

16.6 Use the following excerpts from Swansea Company’s financial information to prepare the

operating section of the statement of cash flows (direct method) for the year 2018.

PB14.

16.6 Use the following excerpts from Swahilia Company’s financial information to prepare a

statement of cash flows (direct method) for the year 2018.

1005

1006

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

PB15.

16.6 Use the following cash transactions relating to Warthoff Company to determine the cash flows

from operating, using the direct method.

Thought Provokers
TP1.

16.2 Use the EDGAR (Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system) search tools on the US

Securities and Exchange Commission website (https://openstax.org/l/50EDGAR) to locate the latest Form 10-K
for a company you would like to analyze. Submit a short memo that provides the following information:
• the name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen
• the following information from the company’s statement of cash flows:
A.

amount of cash flows from operating activities

B.

amount of cash flows from investing activities

C.

amount of cash flows from financing activities

• the URL to the company’s Form 10-K to allow accurate verification of your answers
TP2.

16.3 Use a spreadsheet and the following financial information from Mineola Company’s financial

statements to build a template that automatically calculates the net operating cash flow. It should be suitable
for use in preparing the operating section of the statement of cash flows (indirect method) for the year 2018.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

TP3.

1007

16.3 Consider the dilemma you might someday face if you are the chief financial officer of a company

that is struggling to maintain a positive cash flow, despite the fact that the company is reporting a substantial
positive net income. Maybe the problem is so severe that there is often insufficient cash to pay ordinary
business expenses, like utilities, salaries, and payments to suppliers. Assume that you have been asked to
communicate to your board of directors about your company’s year, in retrospect, as well as your vision for
the company’s future. Write a memo that expresses your insights about past experience and present
prospects for the company. Note that the challenge of the assignment is to keep your integrity intact, while
putting a positive spin on the situation, as much as is reasonably possible. How can you envision the situation
turning into a success story?
TP4.

16.4 Use the EDGAR (Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system) search tools on the US

Securities and Exchange Commission website (https://openstax.org/l/50EDGAR) to locate the latest Form 10-K
for a company you would like to analyze. Pick a company and submit a short memo that provides the following
information:
• The name and ticker symbol of the company you have chosen.
• A description of two items from the company’s statement of cash flows:
◦ One familiar item that you expected to be reported on the statement, based on what you’ve
learned about cash flows
◦ One unfamiliar item that you did not expect to be on the statement, based on what you’ve
learned about cash flows
• The URL to the company’s Form 10-K to allow accurate verification of your answers
TP5.

16.5 If you had $100,000 available for investing, which of these companies would you choose to invest

with? Support your answer with analysis of free cash flow, based on the data provided, and include in your
decision whatever other reasoning you chose to utilize.

1008

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Chapter 16 Statement of Cash Flows

Appendix A

A

1009

Financial Statement Analysis

Financial Statement Analysis
Financial statement analysis reviews financial information found on financial statements to make informed
decisions about the business. The income statement, statement of retained earnings, balance sheet, and
statement of cash flows, among other financial information, can be analyzed. The information obtained from
this analysis can benefit decision-making for internal and external stakeholders and can give a company
valuable information on overall performance and specific areas for improvement. The analysis can help them
with budgeting, deciding where to cut costs, how to increase revenues, and future capital investments
opportunities.
When considering the outcomes from analysis, it is important for a company to understand that data
produced needs to be compared to others within industry and close competitors. The company should also
consider their past experience and how it corresponds to current and future performance expectations. Three
common analysis tools are used for decision-making; horizontal analysis, vertical analysis, and financial ratios.
For our discussion of financial statement analysis, we will use Banyan Goods. Banyan Goods is a
merchandising company that sells a variety of products. Figure A.1 shows the comparative income statements
and balance sheets for the past two years.

Figure A.1

Comparative Income Statements and Balance Sheets.

Keep in mind that the comparative income statements and balance sheets for Banyan Goods are simplified for
our calculations and do not fully represent all the accounts a company could maintain. Let’s begin our analysis
discussion by looking at horizontal analysis.

1010

Appendix A

Horizontal Analysis
Horizontal analysis (also known as trend analysis) looks at trends over time on various financial statement line
items. A company will look at one period (usually a year) and compare it to another period. For example, a
company may compare sales from their current year to sales from the prior year. The trending of items on
these financial statements can give a company valuable information on overall performance and specific areas
for improvement. It is most valuable to do horizontal analysis for information over multiple periods to see how
change is occurring for each line item. If multiple periods are not used, it can be difficult to identify a trend.
The year being used for comparison purposes is called the base year (usually the prior period). The year of
comparison for horizontal analysis is analyzed for dollar and percent changes against the base year.
The dollar change is found by taking the dollar amount in the base year and subtracting that from the year of
analysis.

Using Banyan Goods as our example, if Banyan wanted to compare net sales in the current year (year of
analysis) of $120,000 to the prior year (base year) of $100,000, the dollar change would be as follows:

Dollar change = $120,000 – $1000,000 = $20,000

(A1)

The percentage change is found by taking the dollar change, dividing by the base year amount, and then
multiplying by 100.

Let’s compute the percentage change for Banyan Goods’ net sales.

⎛
⎞
Percentage change = ⎝ $20,000 ⎠ × 100 = 20%
$100,000

(A2)

This means Banyan Goods saw an increase of $20,000 in net sales in the current year as compared to the prior
year, which was a 20% increase. The same dollar change and percentage change calculations would be used
for the income statement line items as well as the balance sheet line items. Figure A.2 shows the complete
horizontal analysis of the income statement and balance sheet for Banyan Goods.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Appendix A

Figure A.2

1011

Income Statements and Horizontal Analysis.

Depending on their expectations, Banyan Goods could make decisions to alter operations to produce expected
outcomes. For example, Banyan saw a 50% accounts receivable increase from the prior year to the current
year. If they were only expecting a 20% increase, they may need to explore this line item further to determine
what caused this difference and how to correct it going forward. It could possibly be that they are extending
credit more readily than anticipated or not collecting as rapidly on outstanding accounts receivable. The
company will need to further examine this difference before deciding on a course of action. Another method
of analysis Banyan might consider before making a decision is vertical analysis.

Vertical Analysis
Vertical analysis shows a comparison of a line item within a statement to another line item within that same
statement. For example, a company may compare cash to total assets in the current year. This allows a
company to see what percentage of cash (the comparison line item) makes up total assets (the other line item)
during the period. This is different from horizontal analysis, which compares across years. Vertical analysis
compares line items within a statement in the current year. This can help a business to know how much of one
item is contributing to overall operations. For example, a company may want to know how much inventory
contributes to total assets. They can then use this information to make business decisions such as preparing
the budget, cutting costs, increasing revenues, or capital investments.
The company will need to determine which line item they are comparing all items to within that statement and
then calculate the percentage makeup. These percentages are considered common-size because they make
businesses within industry comparable by taking out fluctuations for size. It is typical for an income statement
to use net sales (or sales) as the comparison line item. This means net sales will be set at 100% and all other

1012

Appendix A

line items within the income statement will represent a percentage of net sales.
On the balance sheet, a company will typically look at two areas: (1) total assets, and (2) total liabilities and
stockholders’ equity. Total assets will be set at 100% and all assets will represent a percentage of total assets.
Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity will also be set at 100% and all line items within liabilities and equity
will be represented as a percentage of total liabilities and stockholders’ equity. The line item set at 100% is
considered the base amount and the comparison line item is considered the comparison amount. The formula
to determine the common-size percentage is:

For example, if Banyan Goods set total assets as the base amount and wanted to see what percentage of total
assets were made up of cash in the current year, the following calculation would occur.

⎛
⎞
Common-size percentage = ⎝$110,000 ⎠ × 100 = 44%
$250,000

(A3)

Cash in the current year is $110,000 and total assets equal $250,000, giving a common-size percentage of 44%.
If the company had an expected cash balance of 40% of total assets, they would be exceeding expectations.
This may not be enough of a difference to make a change, but if they notice this deviates from industry
standards, they may need to make adjustments, such as reducing the amount of cash on hand to reinvest in
the business. Figure A.3 shows the common-size calculations on the comparative income statements and
comparative balance sheets for Banyan Goods.

Figure A.3

Income Statements and Vertical Analysis.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Appendix A

1013

Even though vertical analysis is a statement comparison within the same year, Banyan can use information
from the prior year’s vertical analysis to make sure the business is operating as expected. For example,
unearned revenues increased from the prior year to the current year and made up a larger portion of total
liabilities and stockholders’ equity. This could be due to many factors, and Banyan Goods will need to examine
this further to see why this change has occurred. Let’s turn to financial statement analysis using financial
ratios.

Overview of Financial Ratios
Financial ratios help both internal and external users of information make informed decisions about a
company. A stakeholder could be looking to invest, become a supplier, make a loan, or alter internal
operations, among other things, based in part on the outcomes of ratio analysis. The information resulting
from ratio analysis can be used to examine trends in performance, establish benchmarks for success, set
budget expectations, and compare industry competitors. There are four main categories of ratios: liquidity,
solvency, efficiency, and profitability. Note that while there are more ideal outcomes for some ratios, the
industry in which the business operates can change the influence each of these outcomes has over
stakeholder decisions. (You will learn more about ratios, industry standards, and ratio interpretation in
advanced accounting courses.)

Liquidity Ratios
Liquidity ratios show the ability of the company to pay short-term obligations if they came due immediately
with assets that can be quickly converted to cash. This is done by comparing current assets to current
liabilities. Lenders, for example, may consider the outcomes of liquidity ratios when deciding whether to
extend a loan to a company. A company would like to be liquid enough to manage any currently due
obligations but not too liquid where they may not be effectively investing in growth opportunities. Three
common liquidity measurements are working capital, current ratio, and quick ratio.

Working Capital
Working capital measures the financial health of an organization in the short-term by finding the difference
between current assets and current liabilities. A company will need enough current assets to cover current
liabilities; otherwise, they may not be able to continue operations in the future. Before a lender extends credit,
they will review the working capital of the company to see if the company can meet their obligations. A larger
difference signals that a company can cover their short-term debts and a lender may be more willing to extend
the loan. On the other hand, too large of a difference may indicate that the company may not be correctly
using their assets to grow the business. The formula for working capital is:

Using Banyan Goods, working capital is computed as follows for the current year:

Working capital = $200,000 – $100,000 = $100,000

(A4)

In this case, current assets were $200,000, and current liabilities were $100,000. Current assets were far greater
than current liabilities for Banyan Goods and they would easily be able to cover short-term debt.
The dollar value of the difference for working capital is limited given company size and scope. It is most useful
to convert this information to a ratio to determine the company’s current financial health. This ratio is the
current ratio.

1014

Appendix A

Current Ratio
Working capital expressed as a ratio is the current ratio. The current ratio considers the amount of current
assets available to cover current liabilities. The higher the current ratio, the more likely the company can cover
its short-term debt. The formula for current ratio is:

The current ratio in the current year for Banyan Goods is:

⎛
⎞
Current ratio = ⎝$200,000 ⎠ = 2 or 2:1
$100,000

(A5)

A 2:1 ratio means the company has twice as many current assets as current liabilities; typically, this would be
plenty to cover obligations. This may be an acceptable ratio for Banyan Goods, but if it is too high, they may
want to consider using those assets in a different way to grow the company.

Quick Ratio
The quick ratio, also known as the acid-test ratio, is similar to the current ratio except current assets are more
narrowly defined as the most liquid assets, which exclude inventory and prepaid expenses. The conversion of
inventory and prepaid expenses to cash can sometimes take more time than the liquidation of other current
assets. A company will want to know what they have on hand and can use quickly if an immediate obligation is
due. The formula for the quick ratio is:

The quick ratio for Banyan Goods in the current year is:

⎛
⎞
Quick ratio = ⎝$110,000 + $20,000 + $30,000 ⎠ = 1.6 or 1.6:1
$100,000

(A6)

A 1.6:1 ratio means the company has enough quick assets to cover current liabilities.
Another category of financial measurement uses solvency ratios.

Solvency Ratios
Solvency implies that a company can meet its long-term obligations and will likely stay in business in the
future. To stay in business the company must generate more revenue than debt in the long-term. Meeting
long-term obligations includes the ability to pay any interest incurred on long-term debt. Two main solvency
ratios are the debt-to-equity ratio and the times interest earned ratio.

Debt to Equity Ratio
The debt-to-equity ratio shows the relationship between debt and equity as it relates to business financing. A
company can take out loans, issue stock, and retain earnings to be used in future periods to keep operations
running. It is less risky and less costly to use equity sources for financing as compared to debt resources. This
is mainly due to interest expense repayment that a loan carries as opposed to equity, which does not have this
requirement. Therefore, a company wants to know how much debt and equity contribute to its financing.
Ideally, a company would prefer more equity than debt financing. The formula for the debt to equity ratio is:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Appendix A

1015

The information needed to compute the debt-to-equity ratio for Banyan Goods in the current year can be
found on the balance sheet.

⎛
⎞
Debt-to-equity ratio = ⎝$150,000 ⎠ = 1.5 or 1.5:1
$100,000

(A7)

This means that for every $1 of equity contributed toward financing, $1.50 is contributed from lenders. This
would be a concern for Banyan Goods. This could be a red flag for potential investors that the company could
be trending toward insolvency. Banyan Goods might want to get the ratio below 1:1 to improve their longterm business viability.

Times Interest Earned Ratio
Time interest earned measures the company’s ability to pay interest expense on long-term debt incurred. This
ability to pay is determined by the available earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) are deducted. These
earnings are considered the operating income. Lenders will pay attention to this ratio before extending credit.
The more times over a company can cover interest, the more likely a lender will extend long-term credit. The
formula for times interest earned is:

The information needed to compute times interest earned for Banyan Goods in the current year can be found
on the income statement.

⎛
⎞
Times interest earned = ⎝$43,000 ⎠ = 21.5 times
$2,000

(A8)

The $43,000 is the operating income, representing earnings before interest and taxes. The 21.5 times outcome
suggests that Banyan Goods can easily repay interest on an outstanding loan and creditors would have little
risk that Banyan Goods would be unable to pay.
Another category of financial measurement uses efficiency ratios.

Efficiency Ratios
Efficiency shows how well a company uses and manages their assets. Areas of importance with efficiency are
management of sales, accounts receivable, and inventory. A company that is efficient typically will be able to
generate revenues quickly using the assets it acquires. Let’s examine four efficiency ratios: accounts receivable
turnover, total asset turnover, inventory turnover, and days’ sales in inventory.

Accounts Receivable Turnover
Accounts receivable turnover measures how many times in a period (usually a year) a company will collect
cash from accounts receivable. A higher number of times could mean cash is collected more quickly and that
credit customers are of high quality. A higher number is usually preferable because the cash collected can be
reinvested in the business at a quicker rate. A lower number of times could mean cash is collected slowly on
these accounts and customers may not be properly qualified to accept the debt. The formula for accounts
receivable turnover is:

1016

Appendix A

Many companies do not split credit and cash sales, in which case net sales would be used to compute accounts
receivable turnover. Average accounts receivable is found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending
accounts receivable balances found on the balance sheet. The beginning accounts receivable balance in the
current year is taken from the ending accounts receivable balance in the prior year.
When computing the accounts receivable turnover for Banyan Goods, let’s assume net credit sales make up
$100,000 of the $120,000 of the net sales found on the income statement in the current year.

Average accounts receivable = $20,000 + $30,000 = $25,000
2
$100,000
Accounts receivable turnover =
= 4 times
$25,000

(A9)

An accounts receivable turnover of four times per year may be low for Banyan Goods. Given this outcome,
they may want to consider stricter credit lending practices to make sure credit customers are of a higher
quality. They may also need to be more aggressive with collecting any outstanding accounts.

Total Asset Turnover
Total asset turnover measures the ability of a company to use their assets to generate revenues. A company
would like to use as few assets as possible to generate the most net sales. Therefore, a higher total asset
turnover means the company is using their assets very efficiently to produce net sales. The formula for total
asset turnover is:

Average total assets are found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending total assets balances found on the
balance sheet. The beginning total assets balance in the current year is taken from the ending total assets
balance in the prior year.
Banyan Goods’ total asset turnover is:

Average total assets = $200,000 + $250,000 = $225,000
2
$120,000
Total assets turnover =
= 0.53 times (rounded)
$225,000

(A10)

The outcome of 0.53 means that for every $1 of assets, $0.53 of net sales are generated. Over time, Banyan
Goods would like to see this turnover ratio increase.

Inventory Turnover
Inventory turnover measures how many times during the year a company has sold and replaced inventory.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Appendix A

1017

This can tell a company how well inventory is managed. A higher ratio is preferable; however, an extremely
high turnover may mean that the company does not have enough inventory available to meet demand. A low
turnover may mean the company has too much supply of inventory on hand. The formula for inventory
turnover is:

Cost of goods sold for the current year is found on the income statement. Average inventory is found by
dividing the sum of beginning and ending inventory balances found on the balance sheet. The beginning
inventory balance in the current year is taken from the ending inventory balance in the prior year.
Banyan Goods’ inventory turnover is:

Average inventory = $35,000 + $40,000 = $37,500
2
$60,000
Inventory turnover =
= 1.6 times
$37,500

(A11)

1.6 times is a very low turnover rate for Banyan Goods. This may mean the company is maintaining too high an
inventory supply to meet a low demand from customers. They may want to decrease their on-hand inventory
to free up more liquid assets to use in other ways.

Days’ Sales in Inventory
Days’ sales in inventory expresses the number of days it takes a company to turn inventory into sales. This
assumes that no new purchase of inventory occurred within that time period. The fewer the number of days,
the more quickly the company can sell its inventory. The higher the number of days, the longer it takes to sell
its inventory. The formula for days’ sales in inventory is:

Banyan Goods’ days’ sales in inventory is:

⎛
⎞
Days' sales in inventory = ⎝$40,000 ⎠ × 365 = 243 days (rounded)
$60,000

(A12)

243 days is a long time to sell inventory. While industry dictates what is an acceptable number of days to sell
inventory, 243 days is unsustainable long-term. Banyan Goods will need to better manage their inventory and
sales strategies to move inventory more quickly.
The last category of financial measurement examines profitability ratios.

Profitability Ratios
Profitability considers how well a company produces returns given their operational performance. The
company needs to leverage its operations to increase profit. To assist with profit goal attainment, company
revenues need to outweigh expenses. Let’s consider three profitability measurements and ratios: profit
margin, return on total assets, and return on equity.

1018

Appendix A

Profit Margin
Profit margin represents how much of sales revenue has translated into income. This ratio shows how much of
each $1 of sales is returned as profit. The larger the ratio figure (the closer it gets to 1), the more of each sales
dollar is returned as profit. The portion of the sales dollar not returned as profit goes toward expenses. The
formula for profit margin is:

For Banyan Goods, the profit margin in the current year is:

⎛
⎞
Profit margin = ⎝ $35,000 ⎠ = 0.29 (rounded) or 29%
$120,000

(A13)

This means that for every dollar of sales, $0.29 returns as profit. If Banyan Goods thinks this is too low, the
company would try and find ways to reduce expenses and increase sales.

Return on Total Assets
The return on total assets measures the company’s ability to use its assets successfully to generate a profit.
The higher the return (ratio outcome), the more profit is created from asset use. Average total assets are
found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending total assets balances found on the balance sheet. The
beginning total assets balance in the current year is taken from the ending total assets balance in the prior
year. The formula for return on total assets is:

For Banyan Goods, the return on total assets for the current year is:

Average total assets = $200,000 + $250,000 = $225,000
2
$35,000
Return on total assets =
= 0.16 (rounded) or 16%
$225,000

(A14)

The higher the figure, the better the company is using its assets to create a profit. Industry standards can
dictate what is an acceptable return.

Return on Equity
Return on equity measures the company’s ability to use its invested capital to generate income. The invested
capital comes from stockholders investments in the company’s stock and its retained earnings and is
leveraged to create profit. The higher the return, the better the company is doing at using its investments to
yield a profit. The formula for return on equity is:

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Appendix A

1019

Average stockholders’ equity is found by dividing the sum of beginning and ending stockholders’ equity
balances found on the balance sheet. The beginning stockholders’ equity balance in the current year is taken
from the ending stockholders’ equity balance in the prior year. Keep in mind that the net income is calculated
after preferred dividends have been paid.
For Banyan Goods, we will use the net income figure and assume no preferred dividends have been paid. The
return on equity for the current year is:

Average stockholder equity = $90,000 + $100,000 = $95,000
2
$35,000
Return on equity =
= 0.37 (rounded) or 37%
$95,000

(A15)

The higher the figure, the better the company is using its investments to create a profit. Industry standards
can dictate what is an acceptable return.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Financial Statement Analysis
There are several advantages and disadvantages to financial statement analysis. Financial statement analysis
can show trends over time, which can be helpful in making future business decisions. Converting information
to percentages or ratios eliminates some of the disparity between competitor sizes and operating abilities,
making it easier for stakeholders to make informed decisions. It can assist with understanding the makeup of
current operations within the business, and which shifts need to occur internally to increase productivity.
A stakeholder needs to keep in mind that past performance does not always dictate future performance.
Attention must be given to possible economic influences that could skew the numbers being analyzed, such as
inflation or a recession. Additionally, the way a company reports information within accounts may change over
time. For example, where and when certain transactions are recorded may shift, which may not be readily
evident in the financial statements.
A company that wants to budget properly, control costs, increase revenues, and make long-term expenditure
decisions may want to use financial statement analysis to guide future operations. As long as the company
understands the limitations of the information provided, financial statement analysis is a good tool to predict
growth and company financial strength.

1020

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Appendix A

Appendix B

B

1021

Time Value of Money

Present Value of $1 Table

Figure B.1

Present Value of $1 Table.

1022

Appendix B

Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity Table

Figure B.2

Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity Table.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Appendix B

1023

Future Value of $1 Table

Figure B.3

Future Value of $1 Table.

1024

Appendix B

Future Value of an Ordinary Annuity Table

Figure B.4

Future Value of an Ordinary Annuity Table.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Appendix C

C

1025

Suggested Resources

The resources listed provide further information on several topics: financial statements from real-world
companies, accounting software and tools, personal finance, accounting organizations, and exams and
professional certifications for accountants.

Sample Financial Statements
The following income statements and balance sheets show the finances of companies representing the
manufacturing, retail, and service industries.
Manufacturing Company: General Motors
• Income statement: https://www.nasdaq.com/symbol/gm/financials?query=income-statement
• Balance sheet: https://www.nasdaq.com/symbol/gm/financials?query=balance-sheet
Retail Company: Costco Wholesale
• Income statement: https://www.nasdaq.com/symbol/cost/financials
• Balance sheet: https://www.nasdaq.com/symbol/cost/financials?query=balance-sheet
Service Company: Prudential
• Income statement https://www.marketwatch.com/investing/stock/pru/financials
• Balance sheet: https://www.marketwatch.com/investing/stock/pru/financials/balance-sheet

Accounting Software and Tools
The resources listed offer a variety of tutorials, training videos, and practice activities using software and tools
common in accounting.
QuickBooks
• QuickBooks tutorials: https://quickbooks.intuit.com/tutorials/
Peachtree/Sage 50
• Peachtree 2011 guide: https://www.perdisco.com/peachtreeLearning/quickReferenceGuide/2011.aspx
• Sage 50 training course with videos: https://www.freebookkeepingaccounting.com/single-post/
Sage-50-Accounts-Training-Course-Part-1
Microsoft Excel
• Excel tutorials, video guides, trainings, and worksheets: https://chandoo.org/wp/welcome/
• YouTube channel with accounting-specific video tutorials: https://www.youtube.com/user/ExcelIsFun
Financial Calculators
• HP10B setup video guide: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lmMdRfKre44
• HP10BII video introduction and examples: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fTqkkeG1xlw
• HP10B and HP12C time value of money calculations video guides: https://www.youtube.com/user/
mssuprof/videos

Personal Finance
These resources can assist you with personal financial planning.

1026

Appendix C

Earnings
• Current starting salaries for recent college graduates for various majors and degrees:
https://careers.kennesaw.edu/employers/docs/2018-nace-salary-survey-winter.pdf
• Accounting-specific salaries and positions: https://www.roberthalf.com/blog/salaries-and-skills/the-riseof-the-accountant-salary-and-10-top-accounting-jobs
Take-Home Pay
• Salary calculator that determines your net pay—the amount you’ll take home in your paycheck that you
need to plan your budget around. In addition to calculating state and federal taxes, this resource allows
you to input other withholdings such as health insurance or 401K contributions:
https://www.paycheckcity.com/
Saving and Retirement Planning
Determining how much your savings will grow and how much you will have in retirement are very important
components of personal financial planning. These links will help you better plan for those aspects of saving.
• This basic savings growth calculator includes graphs that provide helpful visuals of the impact of
changing any assumptions such as the timing or amount of contributions or the interest rate earned:
https://smartasset.com/investing/investment-calculator
• To estimate retirement savings growth, use this calculator that allows you to see the impact of saving now
(enter your current age) versus saving later (enter a future age): https://www.daveramsey.com/
smartvestor/investment-calculator
• This calculator lets you more accurately plan how your retirement savings will grow by allowing you to
input any matching amounts contributed by employers: https://nb.fidelity.com/public/nb/401k/tools/
calculators/contributioncalculator
Budgeting
• A well-planned budget is the cornerstone of personal financial planning. Using the salary, pay and savings
numbers obtained from the resources above, this calculator will help you create a detailed financial
budget: https://www.clearpoint.org/tools/budget-calculator/
Debt Reduction
• Whether it is student loans, credit cards, car loans or any other kind of debt, it is always beneficial to
understand the impact of differing payments on paying off debt. This resource will help you see the
impact of changing the amount paid on the payoff timing and interest paid on the debt:
https://www.money-zine.com/calculators/loan-calculators/debt-reduction-calculator/

Accounting-Related Organizations
A number of organizations are dedicated to regulating and supporting the variety of work undertaken in the
discipline of accounting.
• Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB): https://www.gasb.org
• Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB): https://www.fasb.org
• U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC): https://www.sec.gov
• Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA): https://www.accaglobal.com
• Institute of Management Accountants (IMA): https://www.imanet.org

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Appendix C

Accounting Exams and Certificates
These sites provide information on exams and professional certifications.
Certified Public Accountant (CPA)
• American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA): https://www.aicpa.org/content/aicpa/
• National Association of State Boards of Accountancy (NASBA): https://nasba.org/
• This Way to the CPA: https://thiswaytocpa.com/
Certified Management Accountant (CMA)
• Institute of Management Accountants (IMA): https://www.imanet.org/cma-certification?ssopc=1
Certified Internal Auditor (CIA)
• Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA)-Global: https://global.theiia.org/Pages/globaliiaHome.aspx
• Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA)-North America: https://na.theiia.org/Pages/IIAHome.aspx
Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE)
• Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE): http://www.acfe.com/default.aspx
Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA)
• CFA Institute: https://www.cfainstitute.org/Pages/index.aspx
Certified Financial Planner (CFP)
• Certified Financial Planners (CFP) Board: https://www.cfp.net/home

1027

1028

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Appendix C

Answer Key

1029

Answer Key
Chapter 1
Multiple Choice
1. B
3. C
5. A
7. B
9. B
11. E
13. A
15. D
17. A
19. B

Questions

1. Answers will vary but should include factors such as starting salaries, value of fringe benefits, cost of living,
and other monetary factors.
3. Answers will vary but should include considerations such as price, convenience, features, ease of purchase,
availability, and other decision-making factors.
5. Responses should comment on the growth Netflix has experienced. Although this may have been due to
subscription price increases, the biggest driver of these increases is the number of subscriptions. While this is
only a few data points, it does appear likely that Netflix will continue to grow sales in the next year or so.
Factors influencing this prediction would be competition, changes in the streaming market, and economic
considerations.
7. Answers will vary, but responses should state, in a sentence or two, the primary purpose of the entity. The
goal of this exercise is to have students clearly communicate why the entity exists, the stakeholders served by
the entity, and the role accounting plays in the organization.
9. Answers will vary but should highlight aspects of each model: Brick-and-mortar: higher investment in
physical storefront, interior, etc., to attain visual appeal; insurance and regulatory requirements; space/
storage considerations; lower delivery costs; no delivery time. Online: less overhead costs, higher delivery
costs, higher website and technology costs, competition.
11. Manufacturer: movies; service: hotels, restaurants, waste removal, entertainment; retail: shopDisney,
clothes and apparel.
13. Answers will vary but should include the key services of the SEC related to regulation and enforcement. You
may be particularly interested to explore the SEC’s whistle-blowing initiatives. Responses regarding required
filings for publicly traded companies should include a discussion about the relationship between transparency
and protecting the public interest. The significant amount of invested capital by the investing public is also
relevant to the discussion.
15. Answers will vary but should include the increase in popularity of energy drinks and Monster’s partnership
with the Coca-Cola Company (which now owns close to a 17% stake in Monster). Considerations as to whether
or not to purchase Monster shares today would include the estimated future performance of the company, the
energy drink market, purchasing at a high point, etc.
17. Answers will vary but should include a discussion of the importance for accountants to provide information
that is unbiased. Accountants have an obligation to protect the public interest by reporting information that is
useful for decision-making but does not sway the user in a particular way. Accountants are in a unique
position where they serve many stakeholders, including their employer, clients, and the public. The interests of
all stakeholders must be considered while maintaining the highest level of integrity.
19. Answers will vary and may include certifications/licensing in nursing, information technology, engineering,
human resources management, counseling, medicine, and many other occupations.

Chapter 2
Multiple Choice
1. D
3. A
5. B
7. A
9. B

1030

Answer Key

11. D
13. B
15. C
17. C

Questions

1. Income statement shows the financial performance of a business for a period of time; statement of owner’s
equity shows the change in net worth of a business for a period of time; balance sheet shows the financial
position of a business on a specific date; statement of cash flows shows the cash inflows and outflows of the
business for a period of time.
3. Both revenues and gains represent inflows to the business, making it more valuable. Revenues relate to the
primary purpose of the business, while gains represent incidental or peripheral activities. This is important to
stakeholders because revenues represent ongoing or permanent activities, while gains represent infrequent
or transient activities. Stakeholders should focus on permanent earnings and put peripheral or incidental
earnings into the proper context.
5. Equity is the net worth of the business. It can also be thought of as the net assets (assets minus liabilities) of
the business. Activities that affect equity include revenues, expenses, gains, losses, and investment by and
distributions to owners.
7. Both tangible and intangible assets have value to the company and can be bought, sold, or impaired;
tangible assets have physical substance, while intangible assets do not.
9. Assets = Liabilities + Owner’s Equity. Answers will vary and should include a combination of revenues/gains
(increases), expenses/losses (decreases), investments (increases), and distributions (decreases). It is
important to understand the following transactions/exchanges will not change equity: an asset for an asset,
liability for liability, asset acquisitions by incurring liabilities, and asset reductions to reduce liabilities.
11. Revenues and investments increase equity, while expenses and distributions decrease equity.

Chapter 3
Multiple Choice
1. A
3. B
5. A
7. D
9. A
11. C
13. D
15. B
17. A
19. B
21. B
23. D
25. B
27. A
29. C
31. D
33. C
35. A
37. C
39. C
41. B

Questions

1. Conservatism means that if there is uncertainty in a potential financial estimate, a company should err on
the side of caution and report the most conservative amount. For the example, answers will vary. Sample
answer: When I am budgeting for revenue in our household, I estimate what amount we will be paid, and I
always round slightly down and with the expenses round up slightly so that there is a little leftover.
3. Assets = Liabilities + Equity; Revenues increase equity, while expenses decrease equity.
5. The general journal.
7. Decreasing cash decreases assets; decreasing accounts payable decreases liabilities. Assets (decrease) =
Liabilities (decrease) + Equity (no change).
9. The combined total of liabilities and equity equals the total of assets because there is a claim against every
asset that the company owns. Creditors have claims against some of the company’s assets, in the amount of

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Answer Key

1031

the liabilities owed to them; owners (stockholders) have claims against all the rest of the company’s assets.
Equity is the total of assets minus liabilities, which is sometimes referred to as net assets.
11. The total in accounts receivable will increase with a debit. We know this because accounts receivable is an
asset account, and asset balances increase with debit entries.
13. A journal is a chronological listing of all of the recordable transactions that have occurred in a company.
15. Recognize means to make a journal entry.
17. It is a comprehensive listing for all accounts a company has and their balances.
19. T-accounts represent the changes made to the general ledger. They are used as an illustrative tool when
planning or discussing the effects a particular transaction will have on the accounting records. T-accounts are
used in academic and business situations, as they are easier to sketch out than general journals.
21. A prepaid account is an account that shows the balance of money we have paid in advance of an expense
being incurred. Prepaid accounts are assets.
23. A T-account is a visual depiction of the activity in an account. Entries made on the left side of the T-account
represent debits, while entries on the right side represent credits. The ending account balance is the total net
combined debits and credits for that account.
25. Asset accounts, dividend accounts, and expense accounts are increased with a debit. (Also, contra-liability
accounts, contra-equity accounts, and contra-revenue accounts are increased with a debit.)
27. Normal balance refers to the expected ending balance for an account, based on the way that the account
balance increases (either debit or credit.)
29. The purpose of the trial balance is to recap the account balances, to ensure that debits equal credits. The
trial balance is used to prepare the financial statements, in this order: Income Statement, Retained Earnings
Statement, and Balance Sheet.

Chapter 4
Multiple Choice
1. B
3. A
5. D
7. A
9. B
11. C
13. B
15. D
17. C
19. C
21. A and C

Questions

1. The revenue recognition principle mandates that revenue be reported when earned, regardless of when the
revenue is collected. For this reason, when revenue is earned but not yet collected, an accrual entry is required
to accurately report revenue earned. For the same reason, when cash is collected, in advance of the earnings
process, a deferral entry is required, to accurately report revenue earned.
3. Analyzing transactions (to enable journal entries) is the only analytical part of the accounting cycle. Analysis
is required for both the original transaction entries and the adjusting entries. All of the other steps are just
methodical posting of the entries, summarizing of the balances, regrouping of the accounts for financial
reports, and closing of the accounts for year-end. Only the journal entries require decision-making processes.
5. Accruals—when cash has not moved, but it is time to record the transaction (examples: Accounts Payable or
Accounts Receivable). Deferrals—when cash has moved, but it is not time to record the transaction (examples:
Prepaid Insurance or Unearned Revenue).
7. Adjusting entries always include at least one income statement account and at least one balance sheet
account, because the adjustment process is done to shift revenues and expenses between the Balance Sheet
and the Income Statement, depending on whether it is the correct period to include that income or expense
(report on the Income Statement) or not (report on the Balance Sheet).
9. An entry to adjust the supplies account to the $400 balance is needed; Debit Supplies Expense for 800;
Credit Supplies for 800.
11. An entry to adjust the Prepaid Insurance account to $6,000 balance is needed; Debit Insurance Expense for
6,000; Credit Prepaid Insurance for 6,000.
13. The adjusted trial balance is the summary of account balances after the adjustments have been posted, so
it reflects the corrected balances of all accounts.
15. (A) Income Statement; (B) Balance Sheet; (C) Balance Sheet; (D) Income Statement; (E) Retained Earnings
Statement; (F) Balance Sheet

1032

Answer Key

Chapter 5
Multiple Choice
1. A
3. C
5. A
7. B
9. D
11. C
13. C
15. C

Questions

1. Real/permanent accounts are those that carry over from one period to the next, with a continuing balance
in the account. Examples are asset accounts, liability accounts, and equity accounts. In contrast, revenue
accounts, expense accounts, and dividend accounts are not real/permanent accounts.
3. Closing entries are used to transfer the contents of the temporary accounts into the permanent account,
Retained Earnings, which resets the temporary balances to zero, enabling tracking of revenues, expenses, and
dividends in the next period.
5. Expense accounts and dividend accounts are credited during closing. This is because closing requires that
the account balances be cleared, to prepare for the next accounting period.
7. Income Summary is a super-temporary account that is only used for closing. The revenue accounts are
closed by a debit to each account and a corresponding credit to Income Summary. Then the expense accounts
are closed by a credit to each account and a corresponding debit to Income Summary. Finally, the balance in
Income Summary is cleared by an entry that transfers its balance to Retained Earnings. Thus, it is used in three
journal entries, as part of the closing process, and has no other purpose in the accounting records.
9. The fact that Income Summary has a credit balance (of any size) after the first two closing entries are made
indicates that the company made a net profit for the period. In this case, a credit of $125,500 reflects the fact
that the company earned net income of $125,500 for the period.
11. The post-closing trial balance will include only the permanent/real accounts, which are assets, liabilities,
and equity. All of the other accounts (temporary/nominal accounts: revenue, expense, dividend) would have
been cleared to zero by the closing entries.
13. Working capital is calculated by subtracting current liabilities from current assets. The result indicates how
well the company can pay bills as they come due, which is sometimes referred to as the company’s liquidity
position.
15. (1) First is the Unadjusted Trial Balance, which summarizes the account balances of all accounts in the
ledger, before period-end adjustments. (2) Next, the Adjusted Trial Balance summarizes the account balances of
all accounts in the ledger, after adjusting entries have been posted. (3) Finally, the Post-Closing Trial Balance
summarizes the account balances of all accounts in the ledger, after closing entries have been posted.

Chapter 6
Multiple Choice
1. C
3. A
5. D
7. D
9. C
11. A
13. C
15. A
17. C
19. D
21. B
23. D
25. B
27. B

Questions

1. It helps solidify a long-term relationship with the customer, encourages the customer to purchase more,
and decreases the time it takes for the company to see a liquid asset (cash). Cash can be used for other

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Answer Key

1033

purposes immediately, such as reinvesting the business, paying down loans quicker, and distributing
dividends to shareholders.
3. A sales return occurs when a customer returns merchandise for a full refund. A sales allowance occurs when
a customer keeps the merchandise and is issued a partial refund.
5. Advantages could include real-time data and more robust information. Disadvantages could include fewer
inventory counts with opportunity for mismanagement of inventory. It is also costly, and time consuming.
7.
Oct 18

Accounts Receivable

130

Sales

130

To recognize sale under periodic inventory system
Note: No cost of sale entry is required currently, only at the end of the period under periodic.
9. Cash would be remitted to a retainer if the retailer returns merchandise to a manufacturer after payment, or
if the retailer receives an allowance for damaged merchandise after payment.
11. $110; $1,100 × 50% = $550, $550 × 20% = $110
13. $6.15; $205 × 3%
15. With FOB Destination, the seller is responsible for goods in transit, the seller pays for shipping, and the
point of transfer is when the goods reach the buyer’s place of business. With FOB Shipping Point, the buyer is
responsible for goods in transit, the buyer pays for shipping, and the point of transfer is when the goods leave
the seller’s place of business.
17.
Accounts Receivable

800

Sales

800

To recognize sale on credit, 2/10, n/30, FOB Destination
COGS

300

Merchandise Inventory

300

To recognize cost of sale
Delivery Expense
Cash

100
100

To recognize shipping charge, FOB Destination
19. 32% or $.32; ($176,750 – 120,470) / $176,750
21. The gross profit margin ratio shows the company’s margin over costs of sales to cover operating expenses
and profit. If margin continue to increase over time, an investor or lender might consider the financial
contribution less risky. If the ratio decreases, the stakeholder may perceive an increased risk that the company
may not have enough revenue to service debt.
23. $14.70; $490 × 3%
25. Recognizing the return of merchandise to inventory occurs under the perpetual inventory system but not
under the periodic inventory system.

Chapter 7
Multiple Choice
1. D
3. C
5. D
7. E
9. C
11. D

1034

Answer Key

13. C
15. C
17. A
19. C
21. A
23. B
25. B
27. B
29. B
31. B

Questions

1. A computerized accounting information system performs the same steps in the accounting cycle as a
manual accounting system. Therefore, understanding how a manual system works helps us understand what
a computerized system does. We cannot take a computer apart and show how the accounting information fits
together, but we can show the different pieces in a paper-based system. We want an accounting information
system to be more than just a black box.
3. Scanners can input data faster and typically would produce fewer input errors.
5. All of these areas need an accounting information system. Keeping up with all of the data for an entire year
without it would be difficult. Some companies have their own accounting information to process all of their
transactions except for payroll. They sometimes use a payroll processing company that specializes in
processing payroll transactions for many companies. However, that payroll company also uses computers.
7. Any special journal can require an entry to the subsidiary ledger if the entry involves accounts receivable or
accounts payable.
9. The cash column is not posted to the subsidiary ledger. Only the accounts receivable and accounts payable
columns are posted to the subsidiary ledgers.
11. Any amounts posted to Accounts Receivable or Accounts Payable should be posted daily (to the subsidiary
ledger), and the account totals should be posted monthly. We also post the accounts in the Other Accounts
column individually and may post daily or at the end of the month. We post all other total column amounts
monthly.
13. The four main special journals are sales journal, purchases journal, cash receipts journal, and cash
disbursements journal.
15. We would record the purchase of equipment for cash in the cash disbursements journal.
17. We post entries from the sales journal daily to the accounts receivable subsidiary ledger but monthly to
Sales and to the Accounts Receivable general ledger account.
19. We record purchases of inventory for cash in the cash disbursements journal.
21. Forensic accountants analyze a company’s transactions to determine if a crime has been committed. If they
find evidence, they can testify in court as to their findings.

Chapter 8
Multiple Choice
1. C
3. A
5. D
7. C
9. A
11. A
13. C
15. C
17. B
19. C

Questions

1. Examples include weak internal controls, improper or nonexistent management oversight, and lack of an
internal audit function or other opportunities that create the perception that the fraudster will be successful in
committing a fraudulent act.
3. Examples include vices such as gambling, living beyond one’s means, high debts, employer pressures to
report fictitious accounting results, or alcohol/drug use.
5. Protect data from corruption or damage. Have their servers mirrored at various locations around the world.
Ensure that no unauthorized parties have access to the data. Ensure that all transactions are entered into the
accounting system properly and accurately. If fraud or illegal access to data occurs, a good internal control will

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Answer Key

1035

help identify the responsible party or parties.
8. To ensure that large companies are consistent with internal controls, properly documented, and tested.
10. One person should be responsible for the fund. If one person is in charge and the fund is short, then the
petty cashier is the only one responsible for the shortage.
11. Records all sales and inventory reduction and ensures that correct prices are charged.
13. All differences must be researched, explained, and corrected. Differences pertaining to the bank must be
reported. If fraud is suspected, a complete investigation must be performed.

Chapter 9
Multiple Choice
1. C
3. B
5. C
7. B
9. C
11. A
13. A
15. D
17. B
19. B
21. A
23. B

Questions

1. The matching principle states that expenses must be matched to revenues in the period in which they were
incurred.
3. Nothing will be recognized as revenue, since the flower shop will not provide flowers until June. Until then,
all revenue is considered unearned.
5. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
7. $22,008.88; $323,660 × 6.8%
9. $11,393.10; ($22,480 × 6%) + ($36,540 × 17%) + ($15,330 × 25%)
11. The receivables cycle takes a while to convert into cash, which means that cash is tied up and cannot be
used for other business investments. This could also mean that the company has to borrow money from a
lender to meet its cash flow demands, or that credit extensions are too tight, and good credit candidates are
lost to competitors.
13. Accounts receivable turnover ratio and number of days’ sales in receivables ratio; these ratios can tell a
stakeholder how credit extension policies affect sales, and how quickly current debt is collected
15. A decrease to bad debt expense increases net income, which can show a higher income level and improve
opportunities for borrowing.
17. A higher bad debt expense figure reduces net income, which could have a positive impact on reducing
business income and other taxes.
19. The installment method takes into account risk associated with long-term periodic payments, and it
distributes revenue based on a gross profit percentage over the life of the contract.
21. The completed contract method is used in contracts and delays reporting of both revenues and expenses
until the entire contract is complete
23.
Accounts Receivable

215,465
Notes Receivable

215,000

Interest Revenue

465

25. The principal of a note is the initial borrowed amount, not including interest, requested by the customer.
27. Accounts receivable is an informal, short-term payment and usually no interest, whereas notes receivable
is a legal contract, long-term payment, and usually has interest.

Chapter 10
Multiple Choice
1. D

1036

Answer Key

3. A
5. A
7. A
9. B
11. A
13. C

Questions

1. Gross margin refers to the net profit from sale of goods. It is calculated by subtracting cost of goods sold
from sales revenue.
3. Consigned goods are owned by the consignor, but the goods are physically present in the business of the
consignee. Care must be taken not to count goods held on consignment in the company’s physical inventory
tally.
5. Specific identification works best for highly differentiated goods, large ticket items, customization, and small
lot sizes. In all these cases, it is reasonably easy to keep track of the actual cost of each item, to be used to
offset the sales price, when the goods are sold.
7. LCM sets out to record a conservative value for inventory by ensuring that goods that have decreased in
value since their purchase can be revalued to match their current replacement market value.
9. The FIFO method assumes the first units acquired are sold first. On a periodic basis, that means that ending
inventory can be determined by calculating the number of units remaining, and assuming that the cost of
those units is the amount paid for the latest purchase; cost of goods sold is all inventory cost that is not in the
ending inventory. For perpetual, inventory held at the time of each sale is evaluated and units acquired earliest
are costed out against that particular sale.
11. The weighted-average method requires that the average cost be computed for all units that are available
for sale. For periodic weighted average, the total dollar amount of goods available for sale should be divided
by the total number of units available for sale, to obtain the average cost for the entire period. For perpetual,
the average cost would be recalculated each time the total number of units changes, using the same strategy
as described for periodic, but using the cost and number of units that are available at the time of sale.
13. Causes of inventory errors might be related to consigned goods, goods delivered before or after the title
transfers, sloppy inventory counts, lost records, calculation errors, and any other circumstance that causes
inaccuracy in the counts.
15. The inventory turnover ratio reveals the liquidity of the inventory by highlighting how many times during
the year the entire inventory cycle could be rotated, based on the cost of the inventory sold, compared to the
average cost of the unsold inventory. Days’ sales in inventory reveals how many days it typically takes to turn
inventory around, from date of purchase to date of sale.

Chapter 11
Multiple Choice
1. C
3. C
5. A
7. B
9. D
11. D
13. D
15. A

Questions

1. The main difference between tangible and intangible assets is that tangible assets have a physical substance
to them. This means they can be touched and have some physical form.
3. A patent is a contract that provides a company with exclusive rights to produce and sell a unique product. It
is granted by the federal government and provides exclusivity from competition for twenty years. A copyright
provides the exclusive right to reproduce and sell artistic, literary, or musical compositions for a period of
seventy years beyond the death of the original author.
5. A. capitalized. B. expense. C. capitalized. D. capitalized. E. expense. F. expense. G. capitalized.
7. In measuring and reporting long-term assets, the expense recognition (“matching”) principle is applied.
Under the expense recognition or “matching” principle, the acquisition cost of the asset must be allocated to
the periods in which it is used to earn revenue. In this way, the cost of the asset is matched, as an expense,
with the revenues that are earned from period to period through the use of the asset.
9. Depreciation is the process of allocating the cost of using a long-term asset over its anticipated economic
(useful) life, whereas depletion is the process of expensing the cost of natural resources over the life of the

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Answer Key

1037

asset, typically using a unit-consumed method. Amortization is specifically for intangible assets and typically is
calculated using straight-line with no salvage value.
11. Goodwill is internally generated, but it is not recorded as an asset unless (and only when) one company
acquires another company at a price greater than the total value of the net assets being purchased. The
purchaser will record goodwill for the difference between the fair value of net assets acquired and the
purchase price. Goodwill is not amortized and will be tested annually for impairment.
13. Obsolescence refers to the reduction in value and/or use of an asset. It may refer to the actual physical
deterioration of the asset, which is known as physical obsolescence, or to the loss of value from causes other
than physical deterioration, which is functional obsolescence. Functional obsolescence is specific to the
organization and the usefulness the asset has for the company going forward. This type of obsolescence could
be the result of simply not needing the asset any longer.

Chapter 12
Multiple Choice
1. C
3. D
5. B
7. C
9. B
11. A
13. D
15. A
17. F
19. A

Questions

1. Accounts Payable can be set up as a line of credit between a purchaser and a supplier. The terms of the
invoice usually state that payment is due within a year, or a shorter time frame. Since accounts payable
amounts are due within a company’s operating cycle, this account type would be considered a current liability.
3. A noncurrent liability is due in more than one year or outside a standard company operating period. A
current liability is payable within a company’s operating period, or less than a year.
5. $12,500
7. Accounts Payable and Equipment
9. The likelihood of occurrence and the measurement requirement are the FASB required conditions. A
contingent liability must be recognized and disclosed if there is a probable liability determination before the
preparation of financial statements has occurred, and the company can reasonably estimate the amount of
loss.
11. They are probable and estimable, probable and inestimable, reasonably possible, and remote.
13. A short-term notes payable does not have any long-term characteristics and is meant to be paid in full
within the company’s operating period (less than a year). The current portion of a noncurrent note payable is
based off of a long-term debt but is only recognized as a current liability when a portion of the long-term note
payable is due. The remainder stays a long-term liability.
15. A business borrows money from a bank, and the bank makes the note payable within a year, with interest.
For example, this could come from a capital expenditure need or when expenses exceed revenues.
17. Examples include FICA Social Security, FICA Medicare, Federal Unemployment Compensation Tax (FUTA),
State Unemployment Compensation Tax (SUTA), federal income tax, state income tax, Additional Medicare Tax,
and local income tax.
19. FUTA and SUTA are the acronyms for the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and the State Unemployment Tax
Act. They are unemployment insurance systems that collect funds from employers to cover employees in case
of job disruption beyond their control. The FUTA tax rate is 6% but can be reduced by paying on time to the
state unemployment system. This rate can be reduced down to as low as 0.6%.

Chapter 13
Multiple Choice
1. A
3. D
5. B
7. A
9. A

1038

Answer Key

11. A
13. B
15. C
17. B
19. B

Questions

1. Callable bonds can be bought back by the issuing company whenever they want to, but putable bonds can
be cashed in by the holder whenever the holder wants to.
3. A junk bond is typically titled as a high-yield bond; it sounds less unfavorable than junk. Its rating is below
what is typically expected for investment-grade bonds. Investors and speculators might buy these bonds
because if they don’t default, the rate of return could be significantly higher than investment grade bonds.
However, the possibility of the bonds defaulting and neither paying the interest nor principle at maturity is
higher than with investment-grade bonds.
5. In bond pricing problems, if the interest compounds more than one a year, divide the interest rate by the
number of compounding periods per year, and multiply the number of years by the number of compounding
periods per year. If it is paid quarterly, divide the interest rate by 4 and multiply the number of years by 4.
7. It is the difference between the cash interest payment and the interest on the carrying value.
9. The Discount on Bonds Payable is a contra liability account and reduces the associated liability. The
Premium on Bonds Payable is a liability account and increases the associated liability.
11. DR Interest Expense and CR Cash
13. Bondholders receive the stated rate times the principle, so they would receive $6,000.
15. Amortizing a bond premium reduces interest expense.

Chapter 14
Multiple Choice
1. D
3. A
5. D
7. D
9. B
11. A
13. C
15. C
17. D
19. D
21. B
23. C

Questions

1. Advantages of raising capital through stock include no repayment, no interest, and no mandatory dividends.
Disadvantages include giving up ownership and marketability of stock. Debt requires repayment and an
interest component. Interest is tax deductible whereas dividends are not.
3. The incorporation laws and which states have favorable laws for corporations.
5. To affect the market price, avoid takeover, and limit need for dividend payouts.
7.
Land

12,000

Common Stock
Additional Paid-in Capital from Common Stock

6,000
-

6,000

9.
Equipment

10,000

Common Stock

5,000

Additional Paid-in Capital from Common Stock

5,000

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Answer Key

1039

11.
Dividends Payable

25,000

Cash

25,000

13. In total, there is no change to the total dollar value of the equity section, just a change in the number of
shares outstanding and a change in the par or stated value of the stock.
15. Owners’ equity is the value of assets in a company that remains after liabilities are fulfilled. It is also
referred to as net worth or net assets.
17. An example would be the omission of a payroll accrual or a warranty estimate.
19. Comparative balance sheets and income statements.
21. Yes, as one analytical tool among others.
23. EPS is the only ratio required by GAAP to be reported on the face of the income statement. It must be
reported in two ways: basic and diluted (if applicable).

Chapter 15
Multiple Choice
1. D
3. A
5. B
7. C
9. D
11. A
13. A
15. C
17. B

Questions

1. No; it is a passthrough entity, meaning the taxation flows to the owners. The partners pay taxes on their
distributive share of the partnership’s income.
3. Yes, the partnership can assume liabilities as part of one partner’s contributions. However, that should be
agreed upon during the creation of the partnership agreement, where each partner lists assets and value. In
addition, the assumption of liabilities by the partnership reduces the amount of assets the partner is
contributing and thus the relevant capital account.
5. A strong response would include fixed ratios; a ratio based on beginning-of-year capital balances, end-ofyear capital balances, or an average capital balance during the year; salaries to partners and the remainder on
a fixed ratio; interest on the partners’ capital balances and the remainder on a fixed ratio; and some
combination of all or some of the above methods (salaries to partners, interest on capital balances, and the
remainder on a fixed ratio).
7.
JOURNAL
Date 2016
Feb. 3

Account
Cash

Debit

Credit

90,000

S. Singh, Capital
Table 15.3.
9. 1. sell noncash assets, 2. allocate any gain or loss, 3. fulfill liabilities, and 4. distribute remaining cash
11. Sell non-cash assets
13. The general partners would be expected to make the vendors whole.

Chapter 16
Multiple Choice

90,000

1040

Answer Key

1. C
3. B
5. B
7. B
9. A
11. A
13. D
15. C

Questions

1. The statement of cash flow serves as a bridge between the cash basis bank transactions and the accrual
basis financial statements (balance sheet, income statement, and retained earnings statement). It reveals
where the cash came from, and where it went.
3. Operating, Investing, Financing (always in this order).
5. Any transaction that is related to acquiring or disposing of long-term assets like land, buildings, equipment,
stocks, bonds, or other investments. Can be cash spent for purchase of long-term assets, or cash collected
from sale of long-term assets.
7. The indirect method begins with net income and adjusts for items that affect cash differently than they
affect net income, whereas the direct method requires that each revenue and expense item be converted to
reflect the cash impact from that item. The net cash flow result is the same, no matter which of the two
methods is used.
9. Gains and losses must be removed from the operating section. To accomplish this, reverse the effect of
gains or losses; if a gain has been added to net income, it should be subtracted in the operating section; if a
loss has been deducted to arrive at net income, it should be added back in the operating section. Why? First,
gains and losses relate to long-term assets, which fall under investing activities, not operating activities.
Second, the gain/(loss) on the sale of long-term assets represents the excess/(deficiency) computed when the
asset’s cost basis is subtracted from sales proceeds, so the number does not accurately represent the cash
flow relating to the transaction.
11. Not necessarily. Only the principal balance repayment should be included in the financing section; the
interest component of the note payment is an operating activity.
13. Yes. Some investing and/or financing transactions do not have a cash impact initially. Examples include
purchases of long-term assets that are paid for with long-term debt financing, acquisitions of long-term assets
in exchange for corporate stock, and repayment of long-term debt using noncash assets. These noncash
investing/financing activities would be reported in the notes to the financial statements, or as a notation on
the bottom of the statement of cash flows, but not considered an integral part of the statement.
15. Using the direct method to prepare the operating section requires that revenue and expense items be
converted to the cash basis of accounting, since these items are recorded in company records using the
accrual basis of accounting. The balance sheet, income statement, and retained earnings statement use the
accrual basis balances that are maintained in the company accounting records, and thus can be obtained
directly from the adjusted trial balance, without modifications.

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Index

Index
Symbols

10-column worksheet, 247, 262
10-Qs, 214
401(k), 781
403(b), 781

A

abnormal balance, 124, 172
account, 122, 172
account payable, 787
accountants, 12
Accounting, 12
accounting, 50
accounting cycle, 130, 172
accounting entity concept, 862,
903
accounting equation, 79, 96, 121
accounting information system,
461, 495
accounting information system
(AIS), 452, 498
accounting period, 213, 262
accounts payable, 78, 96
Accounts payable, 748
accounts payable subsidiary
ledger, 473, 498
accounts receivable, 78, 96, 597,
615
Accounts receivable, 580
accounts receivable control, 472,
498
accounts receivable subsidiary
ledger, 472, 498
accounts receivable turnover
ratio, 595, 615
accrual, 262
accrual accounting, 213, 578, 615
accrual basis accounting, 75, 96
Accrual-basis accounting, 301
Accruals, 222
accrued expense, 262
Accrued expenses, 223
accrued revenue, 262
Accrued revenues, 222
accumulated depletion, 720, 727
Accumulated depreciation, 712
accumulated depreciation, 727
additional medicare tax, 780

1041

Additional Medicare Tax, 787
Additional paid-in capital, 872
additional paid-in capital, 903
adjusted trial balance, 236, 262
Adjusting entries, 215
adjusting entries, 262
allowance for doubtful accounts,
587, 615
allowance method, 587, 615
amortization, 720, 727, 848
Amortization, 822
annual percentage rate, 845
appropriated retained earnings,
892, 903
articles of incorporation, 860, 903
artificial intelligence, 495, 498
asset, 73, 96
Assets, 126
audit trail, 458, 498
Auditing, 35
auditing, 50
authorized shares, 869, 903
average cost method, 653

B

Bad debts, 585
bad debts, 615
balance sheet, 73, 96, 244
balance sheet aging of
receivables method, 592, 615
balance sheet method, 591, 615
bank reconciliation, 552, 559
bank service fee, 553, 559
Big data, 495
big data, 498
Bill-and-hold sales, 556
Blockchain, 495
blockchain, 498
bond, 813, 848
bond certificate, 813
bond indenture, 814, 848
bond proceeds, 847
bond retirement, 841, 848
bonus, 938, 947
book of original entry, 133, 140,
172
book value, 219, 262, 833, 848
brokers, 867, 903

C

calendar year, 214, 262
callable bond, 816, 848

Capital, 860
capital, 903
capital account, 947
Capital accounts, 935
Capitalization, 704
capitalization, 727
carrying value, 848
cash basis accounting, 75, 96
cash disbursements journal, 469,
471, 484, 498
Cash discount, 370
cash discount, 420
cash dividend, 903
Cash dividends, 881
Cash flow, 956
cash flow, 983
cash payments journal, 484
cash receipts journal, 469, 471,
481, 498
Cash-basis accounting, 301
Certified Financial Planner (CFP),
49
Certified Fraud Examiner (CFE), 48
Certified in Risk and Information
System Controls (CRISC), 495
Certified Information Security
Manager (CISM), 495
Certified Information Systems
Auditor (CISA), 495
Certified Internal Auditor (CIA), 47
Certified Management
Accountant (CMA), 47
Certified Public Accountant (CPA),
46
Channel stuffing, 556
chart of accounts, 126, 172
Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA),
48
chief executive officer (CEO), 551,
559
chief financial officer (CFO), 551,
559
classified balance sheet, 304, 336
Closing, 287
closing, 336
Closing entries, 287
closing entry, 336
Cloud computing, 455
cloud computing, 498
collusion, 546, 559

1042

Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations (COSO), 535, 559
common stock, 72, 96, 868, 903
completed contract method, 604,
615
compound entry, 141, 172
Compound interest, 821
compound interest, 848
Comprehensive income, 83
comprehensive income, 96
conceptual framework, 117, 172
Conservatism, 120
conservatism, 172, 656, 677
Consigned goods, 655
consignment, 677
consistency, 654
consistency principle, 677
consulting, 36, 50
contingency, 764, 787
contingent liability, 764, 787
contra account, 219, 262, 587, 615,
712, 727
contributed capital, 129, 172, 890,
903
control lapse, 545, 559
convertible bond, 816, 848
cooking the books, 555, 559
copyright, 703, 727
corporation, 62, 96, 860, 903
Corporations, 890
cost accounting, 38, 50
cost of goods sold (COGS), 373,
420
cost principle, 119, 172
coupon rate, 818, 848
credit, 123, 172
creditor, 26, 50
cryptocurrency, 495, 498
current asset, 73, 77, 96
current expense, 708, 727
current liability, 74, 78, 96, 746,
787
current portion of a note payable,
752, 787
current ratio, 93, 96, 312, 336
Cybersecurity, 557
cybersecurity, 559

D

Index

data analytics, 494, 498
data/information storage, 498
date of declaration, 881, 903
date of payment, 881, 903
date of record, 881, 903
debenture, 816, 848
debit, 123, 172
Debt financing, 842
debt financing, 848
debt-to-equity ratio, 865, 903
default, 816, 848
deferral, 262
Deferrals, 218
deferred revenue, 749
deficit in retained earnings, 892,
903
defined contribution plan, 781
defined contribution plans, 787
depletion, 720, 727
deposit in transit, 553, 559
Depreciation, 706
depreciation, 727
direct method, 957, 979, 983
direct write-off method, 585, 615
discount on bonds payable, 834,
848
Dissolution, 931
dissolution, 944, 947
distribution to owner, 96
distributions to owners, 72
dividend, 96
dividend smoothing, 881, 903
dividends, 73
double taxation, 863, 903
double-declining-balance
depreciation method, 715, 727
double-entry accounting system,
122, 172

E

earned capital, 890, 903
Earnings management, 599
earnings management, 615
Earnings manipulation , 599
earnings manipulation, 615
Earnings per share (EPS), 897
earnings per share (EPS), 903
effective-interest method, 824,
848

Data, 452
data, 498

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

Electronic Data Gathering,
Analysis, and Retrieval System
(EDGAR), 459
electronic identifier, 663
elements of the financial
statements, 82, 96
ending account balance, 123, 172
enterprise resource planning
(ERP), 454, 498
Enterprise resource planning
(ERP), 495
entrepreneur, 39
equity, 74, 79, 96
equity financing, 842, 848
ex dividend, 881, 903
expanded accounting equation,
125, 172
expense, 67, 96
expense recognition principle,
119, 172, 579
expenses, 80
expert system, 495, 498
external auditor, 534, 559
External users, 14

F

face value, 814
federal income tax withholding,
777, 787
Federal Insurance Contribution
Act (FICA) tax, 787
Federal Insurance Contribution
Act (FICA) taxes, 780
Federal Unemployment Tax Act
(FUTA), 784, 787
fiduciary duty, 933
financial accounting, 13, 50
Financial Accounting Standards
Board (FASB), 16, 50, 116
Financial statement fraud, 555
financial statement fraud, 559
Financial statements, 63
financial statements, 239
financing activities, 958
financing activity, 983
first-in, first-out method (FIFO),
652, 659, 667, 677
fiscal year, 214, 262
fixed asset, 727
fixed assets, 700
fixed ratio, 936

Index

FOB destination, 656
FOB destination point, 403, 420,
677
FOB shipping point, 403, 420, 656,
677
for-profit business, 18, 50
Forensic accounting, 496
forensic accounting, 498
Fraud, 532
fraud, 559
fraud triangle, 532, 559
free cash flow, 974, 983
free cash flow to assets ratio, 974,
983
free cash flow to sales ratio, 974,
983
Freight-in, 401
freight-in, 420
Freight-out, 402
freight-out, 420
full disclosure principle, 119, 172
fully amortized notes, 822, 848
Functional obsolescence , 724
functional obsolescence, 727

G

GAAP, 116, 578, 585
gain, 68, 96
general journal, 133, 485
general ledger, 122, 172
general partner, 927
general partnership, 930, 947
generally accepted accounting
principles (GAAP), 16, 50, 116, 976
going concern assumption, 120,
172, 862, 903
Goods available for sale, 649
goods available for sale, 677
Goods in transit, 401
goods in transit, 420
Goodwill, 703
goodwill, 727
governmental accounting, 42, 50
Governmental Accounting
Standards Board (GASB), 23, 50
governmental entity, 23, 50
gross income (pay), 777, 787
gross margin, 405, 420, 648
gross profit, 677
gross profit margin ratio, 407, 420
gross profit method, 656, 677

1043

Gross purchases, 369
gross purchases, 420
Gross sales, 373
gross sales, 420

H

historical cost principle, 119

I

IFRS for Small and Medium Sized
Entities, 928
imprest account, 547, 559
Improper cutoff, 556
Incentive, 533
income from operations, 405, 420
income statement, 66, 96
Income statement, 239
income statement method, 589,
615
income summary, 289, 336
Incorporation, 860
incorporation, 903
indirect method, 957, 959, 971,
983
Information Systems Audit and
Control Association (ISACA), 495
initial public offering (IPO), 72, 96,
867, 903
installment sale, 604, 615
intangible asset, 96, 336, 727
intangible assets, 74, 701
Intangible assets, 305
Interest, 608, 751
interest, 615, 787
interest rate, 608, 615
interest-only loan, 810, 848
interim period, 214, 262
internal auditor, 534, 559
internal control system, 538, 559
Internal controls, 535, 538
internal controls, 559
Internal Revenue Service, 777
Internal users, 14
International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS), 116, 976
inventory, 78, 96
inventory accounting, 651
Inventory turnover ratio, 675
inventory turnover ratio, 677
investing activities, 958
investing activity, 983
investment, 707, 727

investment banker, 903
investment bankers, 867
investment by owner, 96
Investments by owners, 71
involuntary deduction, 787
Involuntary deductions, 777
issue date, 607, 615
issued shares, 869, 903

J

journal, 133, 172
journalizing, 140, 172

L

large stock dividend, 885, 904
last-in, first out method (LIFO),
652
last-in, first-out method (LIFO),
661, 668, 677
lender, 26, 50
Liabilities, 128
liability, 74, 96
likelihood of occurrence, 765, 787
limited liability, 862, 947
Limited liability, 931
limited liability partnership (LLP),
931, 947
limited partnership (LP), 930, 947
liquidation, 944, 947
Liquidity, 93, 309
liquidity, 97, 336
local income tax withholding, 780,
787
long-term asset, 73, 97, 727
long-term assets, 700
long-term investment, 305, 336
long-term liability, 74, 97, 305,
336, 810, 848
loss, 69, 97
lower-of-cost-or-market (LCM),
656, 677

M

managerial accounting, 14, 50
Managerial accounting, 38
manufacturing business, 19, 50
market interest rate, 819, 848
market value of stock, 870, 904
matching principle, 119, 373, 579,
615
maturity date, 607, 615, 814, 848
maturity value, 848

1044

measurement requirement, 765,
787
Medicare tax rate, 780, 787
merchandise inventory, 648, 677
merchandising business, 20
merchandising company, 367, 420
modified accrual accounting, 213,
262
monetary measurement, 120, 172
multi-step income statement, 405
Municipal bonds, 835
Mutual agency, 927
mutual agency, 947

N

natural resources, 720, 727
net assets, 74
net cash flow, 983
net cash flows, 957
Net income, 69
net income, 97, 405, 420
net income (pay), 777, 787
net loss, 69, 97
Net purchases, 369
net purchases, 420
Net Realizable Value, 587
net realizable value, 615
Net sales, 373
net sales, 420
no-par stock, 870, 904
noncash expense, 957, 983
noncurrent asset, 73, 77, 97
Noncurrent liabilities, 746
noncurrent liability, 74, 78, 97
nonprofit (not-for-profit)
organization, 23, 50
nonsufficient funds (NSF) check,
553, 559
normal balance, 123, 172
not-for-profit (NFP) accounting,
44, 50
note payable, 751, 787, 810, 848
note receivable, 615
notes payable, 78, 97
notes receivable, 78, 97, 606
Number of days’ sales in
inventory ratio, 675
number of days’ sales in
inventory ratio, 677
number of days’ sales in
receivables, 616

Index

number of days’ sales in
receivables ratio, 595

O

operating activities, 958
operating activity, 983
operating cycle, 304, 336, 366, 420
Operating expenses, 405
operating expenses, 420
organization costs, 863, 904
original source, 133, 172
other revenue and expenses, 405,
420
outstanding check, 553, 559
outstanding shares, 869, 904
Ownership of inventory, 401
ownership of inventory, 420
Owners’ equity, 890
owners’ equity, 904

P

par value, 818, 848, 870, 904
partner, 947
partners, 926
partnership, 62, 97, 926, 947
partnership agreement, 932, 947
Partnerships, 890
patent, 703, 727
Patriot Act, 497
Perceived opportunity, 533
percentage of accounts
receivable method, 591
percentage of completion
method, 603, 616
percentage of sales method, 589
period, 130, 172
periodic inventory system, 379,
408, 420, 649, 677
permanent (real) account, 336
Permanent (real) accounts, 289
perpetual inventory, 755
perpetual inventory method, 487
perpetual inventory system, 378,
386, 392, 420, 650, 677
petty cash fund, 547, 559
physical inventory count, 382, 420
physical obsolescence, 724, 727
point of sale, 454, 498
point of transfer, 401, 420
point-of-sale system (POS), 454,
463, 498

This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col25448/1.4

post-closing trial balance, 286,
336
Posting, 133
posting, 172
preemptive right, 868, 904
Preferred stock, 869
preferred stock, 904
premium on bonds payable, 833,
848
Prepaid expenses, 127
prepaid expenses, 172, 218
principal, 607, 616, 751, 787, 814,
848
Prior period adjustments, 895
prior period adjustments, 904
private corporation, 866, 904
privately held company, 25, 50
probable and estimable, 768, 787
probable and inestimable, 768,
787
promissory, 774
promissory note, 810, 849
property dividend, 882, 904
Property, plant, and equipment,
305
property, plant, and equipment,
336
Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (PCAOB), 117,
540, 559
publicly traded company, 25, 50,
72, 97, 540, 559, 866, 904
Purchase discounts, 369
purchase discounts, 420
purchase returns and allowances,
371, 420
purchase transaction, 368
purchases, 649, 677
purchases journal, 469, 484, 499
putable bond, 849
Putable bonds, 816

R

ratio analysis, 674
Rationalization, 533
realization, 944, 947
reasonably possible, 768, 787
receivable, 580, 616
redeemable bond, 816
remittance advice, 457
remote, 768, 787

Index

restatement, 895, 904
Restricted retained earnings, 892
restricted retained earnings, 904
retail business, 20, 50
retail inventory method, 657, 677
retained earnings, 79, 97
Revenue, 67
revenue, 97
revenue recognition, 556, 560
revenue recognition principle,
118, 173, 373, 578, 616
revenues, 80
reverse stock split, 888, 904
Round-tripping, 556

S

sales allowance, 376
sales discounts, 374, 420
sales journal, 469, 477, 499
sales return, 376
sales returns and allowances, 376,
421
Sales taxes, 754
sales transaction, 368
Salvage (residual) value, 712
salvage (residual) value, 727
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), 540,
560
schedule of accounts payable, 499
schedule of accounts receivable,
499
secondary market, 820, 849, 867,
904
secured bond, 816, 849
Securities Act of 1933, 866
Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC), 28, 50, 72, 97,
116, 496, 665, 863, 904
separate entity concept, 119, 173
serial bond, 849
serial bonds, 816
service business, 21, 50
service company, 366, 421
Sham sales, 556
short-term asset, 73, 97
short-term liability, 74, 97
short-term note payable, 773, 788
Shrinkage, 382
simple entry, 141, 173
simple income statement, 405
small stock dividend, 884, 904

1045

Social Security tax rate, 780, 788
sole proprietorship, 62, 97
Sole proprietorships, 890
source document, 455, 499
special dividend, 881, 904
special journal, 499
special journals, 468
special purpose entities, 557, 560
specific identification, 658, 665
specific identification method,
652, 677
stakeholder, 25, 50, 64, 97
State income tax withholding, 777
state income tax withholding, 788
State Unemployment Tax Act
(SUTA), 784, 788
stated interest rate, 814, 849
stated value, 870, 904
statement of cash flows, 74, 97,
956, 959, 983
statement of owner’s equity, 70,
97
statement of retained earnings,
242
statement of stockholders’
equity, 893, 904
stock discount, 870, 904
stock dividend, 883, 904
stock split, 887, 904
stock trading, 867, 904
stockholder, 25, 50, 904
stockholders, 860
stockholders‛ equity, 173
Stockholder’s equity, 129
Straight-line depreciation, 713
straight-line depreciation, 727
straight-line method, 824, 849
subsidiary ledger, 494

T

T-account, 122, 173
tangible asset, 97, 700, 727
Tangible assets, 74
tax basis accounting, 213, 262
Taxes payable, 753
taxes payable, 788
temporary (nominal) account, 336
Temporary (nominal) accounts,
289
term bond, 849
term bonds, 816

time period assumption, 120, 173
trade discount, 370, 421
trademark, 703, 727
transaction, 15, 50, 133, 173
treasury stock, 869, 904
trial balance, 165, 173, 216
turn-around document, 457, 499

U

unadjusted trial balance, 165, 173
Unearned revenue, 129, 749
unearned revenue, 173, 221, 788
units-of-production depreciation
method, 714, 727
Unlimited liability, 930
unlimited liability, 947
useful life, 219, 262, 700, 727

V

vacation compensation, 784, 788
voluntary deduction, 788
voluntary deductions, 781

W

Warranties, 764
weighted-average (AVG), 695
weighted-average cost method,
653
weighted-average method, 677
working capital, 93, 97, 336
Working capital, 310
working capital ratio, 312

Z

zero balance, 287

