This publication is available at Army Knowledge Online (https://armypubs.us.army.mil/doctrine/index.html). To receive publishing updates, please subscribe at http://www.apd.army.mil/AdminPubs/new_subscribe.asp. FM 3-55 DISTRIBUTION RESTRICTION: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. * This publication supersedes FM 3-55, dated 23 April 2012.
i Field Manual No. 3-55 Headquarters Department of the Army Washington, DC, 3 May 2013 Information Collection Contents Page PREFACE.............................................................................................................. iii INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... iv Chapter 1 INFORMATION COLLECTION FOUNDATIONS .............................................. 1-1 Information Collection and Knowledge ............................................................... 1-1 Information Collection and ISR ........................................................................... 1-1 Information Collection Activities ......................................................................... 1-3 Information Collection Purpose .......................................................................... 1-4 Primary Information Collection Tasks and Operations ....................................... 1-5 Chapter 2 COMMANDER AND STAFF ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES ..................... 2-1 The Commander’s Role ...................................................................................... 2-1 The Commander’s Needs ................................................................................... 2-2 The Commander’s Guidance ............................................................................. 2-2 The Staff’s Role .................................................................................................. 2-3 The Working Group’s Input to Information Collection ........................................ 2-5 Chapter 3 INFORMATION COLLECTION PLANNING AND ASSESSMENT ................... 3-1 Information Collection Planning Considerations................................................. 3-1 Personnel Recovery Support ............................................................................. 3-2 The MDMP and Information Collection Planning ............................................... 3-2 Information Collection Assessment .................................................................... 3-8 Chapter 4 INFORMATION COLLECTION TASKING AND DIRECTING ........................... 4-1 Importance of Tasking and Directing .................................................................. 4-1 Final Information Collection Plan ........................................................................ 4-1 Information Collection Overlay ........................................................................... 4-3 Information Collection Scheme of Support ......................................................... 4-3 Chapter 5 INFORMATION COLLECTION ASSETS .......................................................... 5-1 Information Collection Capability ........................................................................ 5-1 Information Collection Plan by Level .................................................................. 5-1 Information Collection Assets by Phase ............................................................. 5-2 Contents ii FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Information Collection Assets by Echelon .......................................................... 5-4 Network-Enabled Information Collection .......................................................... 5-11 Chapter 6 JOINT INTELLIGENCE, SURVEILLANCE, AND RECONNAISSANCE ........... 6-1 Joint ISR and Unified Action ............................................................................... 6-1 Joint ISR Concepts ............................................................................................. 6-1 Joint ISR Doctrine ............................................................................................... 6-2 Joint ISR Resources ........................................................................................... 6-2 Joint ISR Planning Systems ................................................................................ 6-3 National ISR Resources and Guidelines ............................................................ 6-4 Joint ISR Considerations .................................................................................... 6-6 Joint ISR Organization ........................................................................................ 6-6 Appendix A THE INFORMATION COLLECTION ANNEX TO THE OPERATION ORDER A-1 GLOSSARY .......................................................................................... Glossary–1 REFERENCES .................................................................................. References–1 INDEX ......................................................................................................... Index–1 Figures Figure 1-1. Information collection activities ............................................................................ 1-4 Figure 4-1. Sample information collection matrix ................................................................... 4-2 Figure 4-2. Example of an information collection overlay ...................................................... 4-4 Figure A-1. Example Annex L (Information Collection) annotated format ............................. A-2 Tables Table 2-1. Example of the operations and intelligence working group .................................. 2-7 Table 4-1. Scheme of support ................................................................................................ 4-5 Table 5-1. Sample information collection assets ................................................................... 5-2 Table 5-2. Battlefield surveillance brigade information collection assets .............................. 5-6 Table 5-3. Infantry brigade combat team information collection assets ................................ 5-8 Table 5-4. Armored brigade combat team information collection assets ............................... 5-9 Table 5-5. Stryker brigade combat team information collection assets ............................... 5-10 Table A-1. Sample information collection plan ...................................................................... A-7 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 iii Preface Field Manual (FM) 3-55, Information Collection, provides the tactics and procedures for information collection and the associated activities of planning requirements and assessing collection, tasking, and directing information collection assets. It also contains the actions taken by the commanders and staffs in planning, preparing, executing, and assessing information collection activities. As the Army fields new formations and equipment with inherent and organic information collection capabilities, it needs a doctrinal foundation to ensure proper integration and use to maximize capabilities. The principal audience for FM 3-55 is all members of the profession of arms. Commanders and staffs of Army headquarters serving as joint task force or multinational headquarters should also refer to applicable joint or multinational doctrine concerning the range of military operations and joint or multinational forces. Trainers and educators throughout the Army will also use this manual. Commanders, staffs, and subordinates ensure their decisions and actions comply with applicable U.S., international, and, in some cases, host-nation laws and regulations. Commanders at all levels ensure their Soldiers operate according to the law of war and the rules of engagement. (See FM 27-10.) FM 3-55 uses joint terms where applicable. Selected joint and Army terms and definitions appear in both the glossary and the text. Terms for which FM 3-55 is the proponent publication (the authority) are marked with an asterisk (*) in the glossary. Definitions for which FM 3-55 is the proponent publication are boldfaced in the text. For other definitions shown in the text, the term is italicized and the number of the proponent publication follows the definition. FM 3-55 applies to the Active Army, Army National Guard/Army National Guard of the United States, and United States Army Reserve unless otherwise stated. The proponent of FM 3-55 is the United States Army Combined Arms Center. The preparing agency is the Combined Arms Doctrine Directorate, United States Army Combined Arms Center. Send comments and recommendations on a DA Form 2028 (Recommended Changes to Publications and Blank Forms) to Commander, U.S. Army Combined Arms Center and Fort Leavenworth, ATTN: ATZL-MCK-D (FM 3-55), 300 McPherson Avenue, Fort Leavenworth, KS 66027-2337; by e-mail to usarmy.leavenworth.mccoe.mbx.cadd-org-mailbox@mail.mil; or submit an electronic DA Form 2028.
iv FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Introduction The Army currently has no unified methodology or overall plan to define or establish how it performs or supports information collection activities at all echelons. This publication clarifies how the Army plans, prepares, and executes information collection activities in or between echelons. FM 3-55 emphasizes three themes. First, foundations of information collection that demonstrate information collection activities are a synergistic whole, with emphasis on synchronization and integration of all components and systems. Second, commanders and staff have responsibilities in information collection planning and execution. The emphasis is on the importance of the commander’s role. Finally, the planning requirements and assessing success of information collection is measured by its contributions to the commander’s understanding, visualization, and decisionmaking abilities. With the exception of cyberspace, all operations will be conducted and outcomes measured by effects on populations. This increases the complexity of information collection planning, execution, and assessment and requires more situational understanding from commanders. The staff is part of information collection activities and every Soldier collects and reports information. This field manual cannot provide all the answers. Its purpose is to prompt the user to ask the right questions. This FM complies with Doctrine 2015 guidelines. Chapter 1 provides the Army definition of information collection and its relation to the joint construct of intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. Chapter 2 examines the roles and actions of the commander and staff in information collection planning and execution. This chapter also discusses the working group for information collection. Chapter 3 describes information collection planning and information collection activities assessment. Chapter 4 discusses information collection tasking and directing. The operations staff integrates collection assets through a deliberate and coordinated effort across all warfighting functions. Tasking and directing is vital to control limited collection assets. Chapter 5 provides an overview of the information collection assets and capabilities available to Army commanders. Chapter 6 examines joint intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance activities. Appendix A provides instructions for preparing Annex L (Information Collection) in Army plans and orders. Commanders drive information collection activities through their choice of critical information requirements and through mission command in driving the operations process. Commanders visualize, describe, direct, lead, and assess throughout the operations process with understanding as the start point. Commanders use intelligence preparation of the battlefield (IPB) to develop an in-depth understanding of the enemy and the operational environment. They visualize the desired end state and a broad concept of how to shape the current conditions into the end state. Commanders describe their visualization through the commander’s intent, planning guidance, and concept of operations to bring clarity to an uncertain situation. They also express gaps in relevant information as commander’s critical information requirements (CCIRs). The challenge is for information collection activities to answer those requirements with timely, relevant, and accurate intelligence that enables commanders to make sound decisions. 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 1-1 Chapter 1 Information Collection Foundations This chapter presents information collection. It begins with information collection and knowledge and then discusses information collection and intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. This chapter then discusses information collection activities and purpose. Finally, this chapter discusses information collection purpose and the primary information collection tasks and operations. INFORMATION COLLECTION AND KNOWLEDGE 1-1. Knowledge is the precursor to effective action in the informational or physical domains. Knowledge about an operational environment requires aggressive and continuous operations to acquire information. Information collected from multiple sources and analyzed becomes intelligence that provides answers to commander’s critical information requirements (CCIRs). Commanders use reconnaissance and surveillance to provide intelligence to reduce the inherent uncertainty of war. Achieving success in today’s conflicts demands extraordinary commitment to reduce this uncertainty. INFORMATION COLLECTION AND ISR 1-2. The Army executes intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) through the operations and intelligence processes (with an emphasis on intelligence analysis and leveraging the larger intelligence enterprise) and information collection. Consistent with joint doctrine, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance is an activity that synchronizes and integrates the planning and operation of sensors, assets, and processing, exploitation, and dissemination systems in direct support of current and future operations. This is an integrated intelligence and operations function (JP 2-01). 1-3. ISR provides commanders with detailed and timely intelligence. This intelligence helps commanders gain situational understanding of the threat and the operational environment. This is accomplished by answering requirements focused in time and space and identifying any threats to mission accomplishment. The intelligence staff provides commanders with predictive assessments of threats, terrain and weather, and civil considerations. These assessments also provide commanders with a running estimate regarding the degree of confidence the staff places in each analytic assessment. A running estimate is the continuous assessment of the current situation used to determine if the current operation is proceeding according to the commander’s intent and if planned future operations are supportable (ADP 5-0). 1-4. Information collection is an activity that synchronizes and integrates the planning and employment of sensors and assets as well as the processing, exploitation, and dissemination systems in direct support of current and future operations. This activity implies a function, mission, or action and identifies the organization that performs it. Information collection activities are a synergistic whole with emphasis on synchronizing and integrating all components and systems. Information collection integrates the intelligence and operations staff functions focused on answering the CCIRs. Information collection replaces ISR synchronization and ISR integration. For joint operations, see chapter 6. 1-5. Information collection is the acquisition of information and the provision of this information to processing elements. This includes the following:  Plan requirements and assess collection.  Task and direct collection.  Execute collection. Chapter 1 1-2 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND ASSESS COLLECTION 1-6. The intelligence staff collaborates with the operations officer and the entire staff to receive and validate requirements for collection, prepare the requirements planning tools, recommend collection assets and capabilities to the operations staff, and maintain synchronization as operations progress. (See chapter 3 for more information on planning requirements and assessing collection). TASK AND DIRECT COLLECTION 1-7. The operations officer, based on recommendations from the operations staff, tasks and directs the information collection assets. (See chapter 4 for more information on tasking and directing information collection.) EXECUTE COLLECTION 1-8. Executing collection focuses on requirements tied to the execution of tactical missions, such as reconnaissance, surveillance, security, and intelligence operations, based on the CCIRs. Collection activities acquire information about the adversary and the area of operations (AO) and provide that information to intelligence processing and exploitation elements. Collection activities begin soon after receipt of mission and continue throughout preparation and execution of the operation. These activities do not cease at the end of the mission but continue as required. This allows the commander to focus combat power, execute current operations, and prepare for future operations simultaneously. 1-9. Execute collection subtasks include:  Establish technical channels and provide guidance.  Collect and report information.  Establish a mission intelligence briefing and debriefing program. Establish Technical Channels and Provide Guidance 1-10. This subtask provides and conducts technical channels to refine and focus the intelligence disciplines’ information collection tasks. It coordinates the disciplines’ assets when operating in another unit’s AO. (See FM 2-0 for additional information on this task and its two subtasks: “Establish and maintain technical channels” and “Conduct deconfliction and coordination.”) 1-11. Due to the characteristics of intelligence operations, technical channels ensure adherence to applicable laws and policies, ensure proper use of doctrinal techniques, and provide technical support and guidance to intelligence operations and discipline assets. Applicable laws and policies include all relevant U.S. laws, the law of war, international laws, directives, Department of Defense instructions, and orders. Commanders direct operations but often rely on technical control to conduct portions of the collection effort. 1-12. Technical channels refer to supervision of intelligence operations and disciplines. Technical channels do not interfere with the ability to task organic intelligence operations assets. It ensures adherence to existing policies or regulations by providing technical guidance for intelligence operations tasks in the information collection plan. While not a formal command or support relationship, establishing technical channels is a critical function that ensures the collection asset has the required technical data to perform mission-related tasks. 1-13. Technical channels also involve translating tasks into the parameters used to focus the highly technical intelligence operations collection or the legally sensitive aspects of signals intelligence collection. These channels also include human intelligence military source operations and counterintelligence tasks. Technical channels provide the means to meet the overall commander’s intent for intelligence operations. Technical channels include but are not limited to defining, managing, or guiding the use of intelligence assets or identifying critical technical collection criteria (such as technical indicators and recommending collection techniques or procedures). Information Collection Foundations 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 1-3 Note: In specific cases, regulatory authority is granted to national and Department of Defense intelligence agencies for intelligence discipline collection and is passed through technical control channels. Collect and Report Information 1-14. This task involves collecting and reporting information in response to collection tasks.Collection assets collect information and data about the threat, terrain and weather, and civil considerations for a particular AO. A successful information collection effort results in the timely collection and reporting of relevant and accurate information, which supports the production of intelligence or combat information. 1-15. As part of the collection plan, elements of all units obtain information and data concerning the threat, terrain and weather, and civil considerations in the AO. Well-developed procedures and carefully planned flexibility to support emerging targets, changing requirements, and combat assessment is critical. Once staffs collect the information, they develop a form for analysts to extract essential information and produce intelligence and targeting data. Once Soldiers collect the information, they develop a form for analysis. Collected and processed information is provided to the appropriate units, organizations, or agencies for analysis or action. This analyzed information forms the foundation of running estimates, targeting data, intelligence databases, and intelligence. 1-16. Collection assets must follow standard operating procedures (SOPs) to ensure staffs tag reports with the numbers of the tasks satisfied in the reports. Simultaneously, SOPs ensure assets understand and report important but unanticipated information. Collection assets reporting may convey that collection occurred, but the unit did not observe any activity satisfying the information collection task, which may be an indicator. As a part of reporting, the staff tracks where the collection task originated. This tracking ensures the staff provides the collected information to the original requester and to all who need the information. Correlating the reporting to the original requirement and evaluating reports is key to effective information collection. The staff tracks the progress of each requirement and cross-references incoming reports to outstanding requirements. Establish a Mission Intelligence Briefing and Debriefing Program 1-17. The commander establishes, supports, and allocates appropriate resources for a mission briefing and debriefing program. The battle updates and after action reviews are separate tasks from the mission briefing and debriefing program. The G-2 (S-2) develops a mission intelligence briefing program and complementary debriefing program to support the commander’s program. INFORMATION COLLECTION ACTIVITIES 1-18. At the tactical level, commanders use reconnaissance, surveillance, security, and intelligence missions or operations to plan, organize, and execute shaping operations that answer the CCIRs and support the decisive operation. Figure 1-1 on page 1-4 displays information collection activities. 1-19. The intelligence and operations staffs work together to collect, process, and analyze information about the enemy, other adversaries, climate, weather, terrain, population, and other civil considerations that affect operations. Intelligence relies on reconnaissance, security, intelligence operations, and surveillance for its data and information. Conversely, without intelligence, commanders and staffs do not know where or when to conduct reconnaissance, security, intelligence operations, or surveillance. The usefulness of the data collected depends on the processing and exploitation common to these activities. 1-20. Commanders integrate information collection to form an information collection plan that capitalizes on different capabilities. Information collection assets provide data and information. Intelligence is the product resulting from the collection, processing, integration, evaluation, analysis, and interpretation of available information concerning foreign nations, hostile or potentially hostile forces or elements, or areas of actual or potential operations. The term is also applied to the activity that results in the product and to the organizations engaged in such activity (JP 2-0). Intelligence informs commanders and staffs where and when to look. Reconnaissance, security, intelligence operations, and surveillance are the ways—with the Chapter 1 1-4 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 means ranging from national and joint collection capabilities to individual Soldier observations and reports. The end is intelligence that supports commander’s decisionmaking. The result is successful execution and assessment of operations. This result depends on effective synchronization and integration of the information collection effort. Figure 1-1. Information collection activities 1-21. Information collection activities help the commander understand and visualize the operation by identifying gaps in information, aligning assets and resources against those gaps, and assessing the collected information and intelligence to inform the commander’s decisions. These activities also support the staff’s integrating processes during planning and execution. The direct result of the information collection effort is a coordinated plan that supports the operation. The staff assesses information and intelligence, refines the plan, and issues fragmentary orders to the plan to retask or assign a new mission to assets and units. INFORMATION COLLECTION PURPOSE 1-22. Information collection activities provide commanders with detailed, timely, and accurate intelligence. By answering the CCIRs, information collection activities help commanders make informed decisions. Information Collection Foundations 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 1-5 1-23. For effective information collection activities to occur, the staff must—  Provide relevant information and intelligence products to commanders and staffs.  Provide combat information to commanders.  Contribute to situational awareness and facilitate continuous situational understanding.  Develop a significant portion of the common operational picture (COP) vertically and horizontally among organizations, commanders, and staffs.  Support the commander’s visualization, permitting more effective mission command.  Answer the CCIRs.  Facilitate intelligence preparation of the battlefield (IPB).  Support effective, efficient, and accurate targeting.  Decrease risk for the unit. INFORMATION COLLECTION PLANNING 1-24. Commanders and staffs continuously plan, task, and employ collection assets and forces to collect information. They request information and resources through higher echelons. This information and intelligence helps commanders turn decisions into actions. 1-25. Information collection planning is crucial to mission success. The four fundamentals to plan, synchronize, and integrate information collection activities include:  An information collection effort driven by the commander.  Full staff participation in effective information collection synchronization and integration.  A collection capability, either organic or augmented by nonorganic resources, to conduct information collection.  A capability to analyze and produce actionable intelligence to conduct information collection. 1-26. Commanders must quickly and clearly articulate their CCIRs to the staff during the information collection planning process. This enables the staff to facilitate the commander’s vision and decisionmaking by focusing on the CCIRs. STAFF INVOLVEMENT AND INPUT 1-27. Effective information collection requires the entire staff’s involvement and input. This enables the intelligence staff to identify and assess information requirements and the operations staff to task and direct the effort. 1-28. Conducting information collection activities requires a collection capability, either organic or augmented by nonorganic resources. Commanders use reconnaissance tasks, security operations, surveillance tasks, intelligence operations, and the skills of Soldiers to obtain information. All activities that help develop understanding of the AO are considered information collection activities. Planners must understand all collection assets and resources available to them and the procedures to request or task collection from those assets, resources, and organizations. (See chapter 5 for more information on information collection assets.) 1-29. Conducting information collection activities requires an analytical capability to interpret information and produce actionable intelligence. The analyst’s ability to employ critical thinking and use multiple sources during intelligence analysis reduces uncertainty and helps solve problems not resolved using single source of information. This requires staff sections to understand the capabilities and limitations of assets to collect and report. The staff must also establish reporting guidelines to the collection assets. PRIMARY INFORMATION COLLECTION TASKS AND OPERATIONS 1-30. Information collection includes all activities and operations that gather data and information used to create knowledge and support the commander’s requirements, situational understanding, and visualization. Commanders achieve information collection when they employ all collection tasks and operations together Chapter 1 1-6 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 in an operation. This appropriate mix of collection tasks and operations helps satisfy many different requirements. It also ensures that the operations and intelligence working group does not favor or become too reliant on one particular unit, discipline, or system. The Army has four tasks or operations it primarily conducts as a part of the information collection plan:  Reconnaissance.  Surveillance.  Security operations.  Intelligence operations. RECONNAISSANCE 1-31. Reconnaissance is a mission undertaken to obtain, by visual observation or other detection methods, information about the activities and resources of an enemy or adversary, or to secure data concerning the meteorological, hydrographic, or geographic characteristics of a particular area (JP 2-0). Reconnaissance primarily relies on the human dynamic rather than technical means and it is a focused collection effort. A combined arms operation, reconnaissance actively collects information against targets for a specified time based on mission objectives. 1-32. Successful and effective units combine three methods to perform reconnaissance: dismounted, mounted, and aerial. Sensors can augment each method. To gain information on the enemy or a particular area, units use passive surveillance, technical means, and human interaction or they fight for information. 1-33. Reconnaissance produces information concerning the AO. Staffs perform reconnaissance before, during, and after other operations to provide information used in the IPB process. Commanders perform reconnaissance to formulate, confirm, or modify a course of action (COA). Reconnaissance provides information that commanders use to make informed decisions to confirm or modify the concept of operations. This information may concern the enemy, the local population, or any other aspect of the AO. Commanders at all echelons incorporate reconnaissance into their operations. 1-34. Reconnaissance identifies terrain characteristics, enemy and friendly obstacles to movement, and the disposition of enemy forces and civilians so that commanders can maneuver forces freely with reduced risk. Reconnaissance before unit movements and occupation of assembly areas is critical to protecting the force and preserving combat power. It also keeps Army forces free from contact to focus on the decisive operation. Reconnaissance Objective 1-35. Commanders orient their reconnaissance by identifying a reconnaissance objective in the AO. Reconnaissance objective is a terrain feature, geographic area, enemy force, adversary, or other mission or operational variable, such as civil considerations, about which the commander wants additional information. (ADRP 3-90).The reconnaissance objective specifies the most important result to obtain from the reconnaissance mission. Every reconnaissance mission specifies a reconnaissance objective. Commanders assign reconnaissance objectives based on CCIRs, reconnaissance asset capabilities, and reconnaissance asset limitations. The reconnaissance objective can be information about a geographical location (such as the cross-country trafficability of an area), an enemy activity to confirm or deny, an enemy element to locate or track, or civil considerations (such as critical infrastructure). The unit uses the reconnaissance objective to guide in setting priorities when it lacks time to complete all the tasks associated with a form of reconnaissance. 1-36. Commanders may need to provide additional detailed instructions beyond the reconnaissance objective (such as tasks performed or the priority of tasks). Commanders issue additional guidance to their reconnaissance units or specify these instructions in the tasks to subordinate units in the operation order. For example, if a unit S-2 concludes that the enemy is not in an area and the terrain appears trafficable without obstacles, the commander may direct the reconnaissance squadron to conduct a zone reconnaissance mission. The commander may provide guidance to move rapidly and report, by exception, any terrain obstacles that significantly slows the movement of subordinate maneuver echelons. Alternatively, when the objective is to locate an enemy force, the reconnaissance objective would be that Information Collection Foundations 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 1-7 force. Additional guidance could be to conduct only that terrain reconnaissance necessary to find the enemy and develop the situation. Reconnaissance Fundamentals 1-37. The seven fundamentals of reconnaissance are—  Ensure continuous reconnaissance.  Do not keep reconnaissance assets in reserve.  Orient on the reconnaissance objective.  Report information rapidly and accurately.  Retain freedom of maneuver.  Gain and maintain enemy contact.  Develop the situation rapidly. Ensure Continuous Reconnaissance 1-38. The commander conducts reconnaissance before, during, and after all operations. Before an operation, reconnaissance focuses on filling gaps in information about the enemy, civil considerations, and the terrain. During an operation, reconnaissance focuses on providing the commander with updated information that verifies the enemy’s composition, dispositions, and intentions as the battle progresses. This allows commanders to verify which COA the enemy adopts and to determine if the plan is still valid based on actual events in the AO. After an operation, reconnaissance focuses on maintaining contact with the enemy forces to determine their next move. It also focuses on collecting information necessary for planning subsequent operations. In stability and defense support of civil authorities operations, reconnaissance focuses on civil considerations. Do Not Keep Reconnaissance Assets in Reserve 1-39. Reconnaissance assets, such as artillery assets, are never kept in reserve. When committed, reconnaissance assets use all resources to accomplish the mission. This does not mean that all assets are committed all the time. Commanders use reconnaissance assets based on their capabilities and the mission variables to achieve the maximum coverage needed to answer the CCIRs. At times, this requires commanders to withhold or position reconnaissance assets to ensure the assets are available at critical times and places. Commanders sustain and rest reconnaissance assets as necessary, but do not place these assets in reserve. Commanders treat all reconnaissance assets as committed assets with missions. This fundamental does not apply to units with multiple roles that can conduct reconnaissance, security, and other combat missions in an economy of force role. Commanders may elect to place these units in reserve as needed. Orient on the Reconnaissance Objective 1-40. The commander uses the reconnaissance objective to focus the unit’s reconnaissance efforts. Commanders of subordinate reconnaissance elements remain focused on achieving this objective, regardless of what their forces encounter during the mission. When time, unit capabilities limitations, or enemy actions prevent a unit from performing all the tasks normally associated with a particular form of reconnaissance, the unit uses the reconnaissance objective to focus the reconnaissance effort. Report Information Rapidly and Accurately 1-41. Reconnaissance assets acquire and report accurate and timely information on the enemy, civil considerations, and the terrain where operations occur. Information may quickly lose its value. Reconnaissance units report exactly what they see and, if appropriate, what they do not see. Information that seems unimportant may be important when combined with other information. Negative reports are as important as reports of enemy activity. Reconnaissance assets must report all information, including a lack of enemy activity. Failure to report tells the commander nothing. The unit communications plan ensures that unit reconnaissance assets have the proper communication equipment to support the integrated information collection plan. Chapter 1 1-8 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Retain Freedom of Maneuver 1-42. Reconnaissance assets must retain battlefield mobility to accomplish missions. If these assets are decisively engaged, reconnaissance stops and a battle for survival begins. Reconnaissance assets must have clear engagement criteria that support the maneuver commander’s intent. Initiative and knowledge of both the terrain and the enemy reduce the likelihood of decisive engagement and help maintain freedom of movement. Before initial contact, the reconnaissance unit adopts a combat formation designed to gain contact with the smallest possible friendly element. This provides the unit with the maximum opportunity for maneuver and enables it to avoid the enemy’s ability to engage the unit. The IPB process helps the commander identify anticipated areas of likely contact. Using indirect fires to provide suppression and obscuration and destroy point targets is a method reconnaissance assets use to retain freedom of maneuver. Gain and Maintain Enemy Contact 1-43. Once a unit conducting reconnaissance gains contact with the enemy, it maintains that contact unless the commander directing the reconnaissance orders otherwise or the survival of the unit is at risk. This does not mean that individual scout and reconnaissance teams cannot break contact with the enemy. The commander of the unit conducting reconnaissance maintains contact using all available resources. The methods of maintaining contact range from surveillance to close combat. Surveillance, combined with stealth, is often sufficient to maintain contact and is the preferred method. Units conducting reconnaissance avoid combat unless it is necessary to gain essential information. If this is the intent, the units use maneuver (fire and movement) to maintain contact while avoiding decisive engagement. Develop the Situation Rapidly 1-44. When a reconnaissance asset encounters an enemy force or an obstacle, it must quickly determine the threat it faces. For an enemy force, the reconnaissance asset must determine the enemy’s composition, dispositions, activities, and movements and assess the implications of that information.For an obstacle, the reconnaissance asset must determine the obstacle’s type and extent and if it is covered by fire. Obstacles can provide information concerning the location of enemy forces, weapons capabilities, and organization of fires. In most cases, the reconnaissance unit developing the situation uses actions on contact. Reconnaissance Forms 1-45. ADRP 3-90 discusses the five forms of reconnaissance in detail. Those five forms of reconnaissance operations are—  Route reconnaissance.  Zone reconnaissance.  Area reconnaissance.  Reconnaissance in force.  Special reconnaissance. Route Reconnaissance 1-46. Route reconnaissance focuses along a line of communications such as a road, railway, or cross- country mobility corridor. It provides new or updated information on route conditions such as obstacles and bridge classifications and enemy and civilian activity along the route. A route reconnaissance includes the route and terrain along the route where the enemy could influence the friendly force’s movement. The commander normally assigns this mission to use a route for friendly movement. Zone Reconnaissance 1-47. Zone reconnaissance involves a directed effort to obtain detailed information on all routes, obstacles, terrain, enemy forces, or civil considerations in a zone defined by boundaries. Obstacles include both existing and reinforcing, as well as areas with chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) contamination. Commanders assign zone reconnaissance missions when they need additional information on a zone before committing other forces in the zone. Zone reconnaissance missions are appropriate when the enemy situation is vague, existing knowledge of the terrain is limited, or combat operations have altered Information Collection Foundations 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 1-9 the terrain. A zone reconnaissance may include several route or area reconnaissance missions assigned to subordinate units. Area Reconnaissance 1-48. Area reconnaissance focuses on obtaining detailed information about the enemy activity, terrain, or civil considerations in a prescribed area. This area may include a town, a neighborhood, a ridgeline, woods, an airhead, or any other feature critical to operations. The area may consist of a single point (such as a bridge or an installation). Areas are normally smaller than zones and not usually contiguous to other friendly areas targeted for reconnaissance. Because the area is smaller, units conduct an area reconnaissance more quickly than a zone reconnaissance. Reconnaissance in Force 1-49. A reconnaissance in force is an aggressive reconnaissance conducted as an offensive operation with clearly stated reconnaissance objectives. A reconnaissance in force is a deliberate combat operation that discovers or tests the enemy’s strength, dispositions, or reactions. This force also obtains other information. For example, battalion-sized task forces or larger organizations usually conduct a reconnaissance in force. A commander assigns a reconnaissance in force when the enemy operates in an area and the commander cannot obtain adequate intelligence by any other means. A unit may also conduct a reconnaissance in force in restrictive-type terrain where the enemy is likely to ambush smaller reconnaissance forces. The overall goal of reconnaissance in force is to determine enemy weaknesses. It differs from other reconnaissance because it is only conducted to gain information about the enemy and not the terrain. Special Reconnaissance 1-50. Special reconnaissance includes reconnaissance and surveillance actions conducted as a special operation in hostile, denied, or politically sensitive environments to collect or verify information of strategic or operational significance, employing military capabilities not normally found in conventional forces (JP 3-05). Special operations forces capabilities for gaining access to denied and hostile areas, worldwide communications, and specialized aircraft and sensors enable them to conduct special reconnaissance against targets inaccessible to other forces or assets. Special reconnaissance activities include—  Environmental reconnaissance.  Armed reconnaissance.  Target and threat assessment.  Post strike reconnaissance. 1-51. See JP 3-05 for additional information on these special reconnaissance activities. Reconnaissance Focus, Reconnaissance Tempo, and Engagement Criteria 1-52. Commanders decide what guidance they provide to shape the reconnaissance and surveillance effort. In terms of guidance, reconnaissance tempo and engagement criteria most closely apply organic reconnaissance elements. Reconnaissance focus is also generally applied to surveillance assets, but in the sense of focusing a reconnaissance mission, it more closely applies to reconnaissance. Paragraphs 1-53 through 1-59 describe these criteria in terms of reconnaissance. Reconnaissance Focus 1-53. Reconnaissance focus, combined with one or more reconnaissance objectives, helps concentrate the efforts of the reconnaissance assets. The commander’s focus for reconnaissance usually falls in three general areas: CCIRs, targeting, and voids in information. The commander’s focus enables reconnaissance units to prioritize taskings and narrow the scope of operations. An operation may have a terrain focus where the status of routes, bridges, and obstacles are more important than the enemy. Conversely, the operation may focus on the enemy. Friendly forces must locate the enemy’s security zone, main body, and reserves. Additionally, commanders may express their focus in terms of reconnaissance pull and push. Chapter 1 1-10 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 1-54. Commanders use a reconnaissance pull when they are not familiar with the enemy situation or the situation changes rapidly. Reconnaissance pull fosters planning and decisionmaking based on changing assumptions into confirmed information. The unit uses initial assumptions and CCIRs to deploy reconnaissance assets early to collect information for developing COAs. The commander uses reconnaissance assets to confirm or deny initial CCIRs before deciding on a COA or maneuver option. This pulls the unit to the decisive point on the battlefield. Success of the reconnaissance pull requires an integrated information collection plan used before the commander makes a COA decision. 1-55. Commanders use a reconnaissance push once committed to a COA or maneuver option. The commander pushes reconnaissance assets forward, as necessary, to gain greater visibility on a named area of interest (NAI) to confirm or deny the assumptions on which the COA is based. Staffs use the information gathered during reconnaissance push to finalize the unit’s plan. Reconnaissance Tempo 1-56. Tempo is the relative speed and rhythm of military operations over time with respect to the enemy (ADRP 3-0). In reconnaissance, tempo defines the pace of the operation and influences the depth of detail the reconnaissance can yield. Commanders establish time requirements for the reconnaissance force and express those requirements in a statement that describes the degree of completeness, covertness, and potential for engagement they are willing to accept. Commanders use their guidance on reconnaissance tempo to control the momentum of reconnaissance. Reconnaissance tempo is rapid or deliberate and forceful or stealthy. 1-57. Rapid operations and deliberate operations provide a description of the degree of completeness required by the commander. Rapid operations focus on key pieces of information and include few tasks. These operations describe reconnaissance that personnel must perform in a time-constrained environment. Deliberate operations are slow, detailed, and broad-based and accomplish numerous tasks. The commander must allocate a significant amount of time to conduct a deliberate reconnaissance. 1-58. Forceful and stealthy operations provide a description of the level of covertness that commanders require. Units conduct forceful operations with little concern about who observes. Mounted units or combat units serving in a reconnaissance role often conduct forceful operations. In addition, forceful operations are appropriate in stability operations where the threat is not significant in relation to the requirement for information. Units conduct stealthy operations to minimize chance contact and prevent the reconnaissance force from detection. These operations occur dismounted and require increased time for success. Engagement Criteria 1-59. Engagement criteria establish minimum thresholds for engagement (lethal and nonlethal). The criteria clearly specify which targets the reconnaissance element expects to engage and which the reconnaissance element will hand off to other units or assets. For example, nonlethal contact identifies engagement criteria for tactical questioning of civilians and factional leaders. This criterion allows unit commanders to anticipate bypass criteria and develop a plan to maintain visual contact with bypassed threats. SURVEILLANCE 1-60. Surveillance is the systematic observation of aerospace, surface, or subsurface areas, places, persons, or things, by visual, aural, electronic, photographic, or other means (JP 3-0). Surveillance involves observing an area to collect information. 1-61. In the observation of a given area, the focus and tempo of the collection effort primarily comes from the commander’s intent and guidance. Surveillance involves observing the threat and local populace in a NAI or target area of interest (TAI). Surveillance may be a stand-alone mission or part of a reconnaissance mission (particularly area reconnaissance). Elements conducting surveillance must maximize assets, maintain continuous surveillance on all NAIs and TAIs, and report all information rapidly and accurately. 1-62. Surveillance tasks can be performed by a variety of assets (ground, air, sea, and space), means (Soldier and systems), and mediums (throughout the electromagnetic spectrum). Information Collection Foundations 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 1-11 1-63. Generally, surveillance is a “task” when performed as part of a reconnaissance mission. However, many Army, joint, and national systems are designed to conduct only surveillance. These are surveillance missions. Army military intelligence organizations typically conduct surveillance missions. Reconnaissance units can conduct surveillance tasks as part of reconnaissance, security, or other missions. Reconnaissance and surveillance both include observation and reporting. 1-64. Surveillance is distinct from reconnaissance. Surveillance is tiered and layered with technical assets that collect information. It is passive and continuous. Reconnaissance is active in the collection of information (such as maneuver) and usually includes human participation. Additionally, reconnaissance may involve fighting for information. Sometimes these operations are deliberate, as in a reconnaissance in force; however, the purpose of reconnaissance is to collect information, not initiate combat. Reconnaissance involves many tactics, techniques, and procedures throughout the course of a mission. An extended period of surveillance may be a tactic or technique. Commanders complement surveillance with frequent reconnaissance. Surveillance, in turn, increases the efficiency of reconnaissance by focusing those missions while reducing the risk to Soldiers. 1-65. Both reconnaissance and surveillance involves detection, location, tracking, and identification of entities in an assigned area gaining environmental data. Reconnaissance and surveillance are not executed the same way. During reconnaissance, collection assets find information by systematically checking different locations in the area. During surveillance, collection assets watch the same area and wait for information to emerge when an entity or its signature appears. 1-66. Reconnaissance and surveillance complement each other by cueing the commitment of collection assets against locations or specially targeted enemy units. An airborne surveillance asset may discover indicators of enemy activity that cues a reconnaissance mission. In some cases, surveillance assets may answer questions. Surveillance Characteristics 1-67. Effective surveillance—  Maintains continuous observations of all assigned NAIs and TAIs.  Provides early warning.  Detects, tracks, and assesses key targets.  Provides mixed, redundant, and overlapping coverage. Maintains Continuous Surveillance of All Assigned Named Areas of Interest and Target Areas of Interest 1-68. Once the surveillance of a NAI or TAI commences, units maintain it until they complete the mission or the higher commander terminates the mission. Commanders designate the receiver of the information and the means of communication. Continuous surveillance requires multiple collection assets, a purpose (requirement), a location (NAI or TAI) for each asset, and an information collection task. Effective commanders avoid designating too many NAIs and TAIs. Information collection suffers because of excessive requirements. During the plan and assess phase, the staff selects collection assets that best answer the information requirements developed from the CCIRs. During tasking and direct phases, the operations officer tasks assets to ensure continuous coverage. Provides Early Warning 1-69. Surveillance provides early warning of an enemy or threat action. Together with IPB, commanders use information collection to ascertain the enemy or threat course of action and timing. Commanders then orient assets to observe these locations for indicators of threat actions. Reporting must be timely and complete. Detects, Tracks, and Assesses Key Targets 1-70. Surveillance support to targeting includes detecting, tracking, and assessing key targets. This support includes detecting and tracking desired targets in a timely, accurate manner. Clear and concise tasks are required so the surveillance systems can detect a given target. Target tracking is inherent to detection. Chapter 1 1-12 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Mobile targets must be tracked to maintain a current target location. Once a target is detected, targeting planning cells must also consider the need to track targets. Tracking targets requires a heavy commitment of limited information collection assets and resources. Assessing key targets pertains to the results of attacks on targets. This helps commanders and staffs determine if targeting objectives were met. Provides Mixed, Redundant, and Overlapping Coverage 1-71. Commanders integrate the capabilities of limited assets to provide mixed, redundant, and overlapping coverage of critical locations identified during planning. The intelligence and operations staff work together to achieve balance. Commanders and staff continuously assess surveillance results to determine any changes in critical locations requiring this level of coverage. Surveillance Types 1-72. The types of surveillance are—  Zone surveillance.  Area surveillance.  Point surveillance.  Network surveillance. Note: Forms of reconnaissance, as opposed to types of surveillance, are associated with maneuver units and missions. Zone Surveillance 1-73. Zone surveillance is the temporary or continuous observation of an extended geographic zone defined by boundaries. It is associated with, but not limited to, a TAI or a NAI. Zone surveillance covers the widest geographical area of any type of surveillance. Multiple assets, including airborne surveillance assets and radar with wide coverage capabilities, are employed in zone surveillance. Area Surveillance 1-74. Area surveillance is the temporary or continuous observation of a prescribed geographic area. It is associated with, but not limited to, a TAI or NAI. This area may include a town, a neighborhood, ridgeline, wood line, border crossing, farm, plantation, cluster, or group of buildings or other man-made or geographic feature. Unlike area reconnaissance, it does not include individual structures (such as a bridge or single building). Ground-mounted surveillance systems are particularly useful in area surveillance. Point Surveillance 1-75. Point surveillance is the temporary or continuous observation of a place (such as a structure), person, or object. This is associated with, but not limited to, a TAI or a NAI. Out of all forms of surveillance, it is the most limited in geographic scope. Point surveillance may involve tracking people. When surveillance involves tracking people, the “point” is that person or persons, regardless of movement and location. Tracking people normally requires a heavier commitment of assets and close coordination for handoff to ensure continuous observation. Network Surveillance 1-76. Network surveillance is the observation of organizational, social, communications, cyberspace, or infrastructure connections and relationships. Network surveillance can also seek detailed information on connections and relationships among individuals, groups, and organizations, and the role and importance of aspects of physical or virtual infrastructure (such as bridges, marketplaces, and roads) in everyday life. It is associated with, but not limited to, a TAI or a NAI. Information Collection Foundations 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 1-13 SECURITY OPERATIONS 1-77. Security operations are those operations undertaken by a commander to provide early and accurate warning of enemy operations, to provide the force being protected with time and maneuver space within which to react to the enemy, and to develop the situation to allow the commander to effectively use the protected force (ADRP 3-90). Security operations are shaping operations that can occur during all operations. Other collection assets provide the commander with early warning and information on the strength and disposition of enemy forces. The availability of information collection assets enables greater flexibility in the employment of the security force. 1-78. Security operations aim to protect the force from surprise and reduce the unknowns in any situation. A commander undertakes these operations to provide early and accurate warning of enemy operations, to provide the force being protected with time and maneuver space to react to the enemy, and to develop the situation to allow the commander to use the protected force.Commanders may conduct security operations to the front, flanks, and rear of their forces. The main difference between security operations and reconnaissance is that security operations orient on the force or facility protected, while reconnaissance is enemy, populace, and terrain oriented. 1-79. The five tasks of security operations commanders may employ are screen, guard, cover, area security, and local security. (See ADRP 3-90 for more information on the five tasks of security operations and their tactical employment.) 1-80. Successful security operations depends on properly applying the following five fundamentals:  Provide early and accurate warning.  Provide reaction time and maneuver space.  Orient on the force or facility to be secured.  Perform continuous reconnaissance.  Maintain enemy contact. 1-81. To collect information and apply the fundamentals for security operations, the security force aggressively and continuously seeks the enemy, interacts with the populace, and reconnoiters key terrain. It conducts active area or zone reconnaissance to detect enemy movement or enemy preparations for action and to learn as much as possible about the terrain. The ultimate goal is to detect the enemy’s COA and help the main body counter it. Terrain information focuses on its possible use by the enemy or friendly force, either for offensive or defensive operations. Stationary security forces use combinations of observation posts, aviation, intelligence collection assets, and battle positions to perform reconnaissance. Moving security forces perform zone, area, or route reconnaissance along with using observation posts and battlefield positions to apply this fundamental. INTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS 1-82. Intelligence operations are the tasks undertaken by military intelligence units and Soldiers to obtain information to satisfy validated requirements (ADRP 2-0). (See ADRP 2-0 for further discussion on intelligence operations and each discipline.) Intelligence operations align intelligence assets and resources against requirements to collect information and intelligence to inform the commander’s decisions. Conducting intelligence operations requires an organic collection and analysis capability. Successful intelligence operations support the unit’s ability to conduct focused intelligence analysis. Data and information collected during the course of intelligence operations is essential to the development of timely, relevant, accurate, predictive, and tailored intelligence products. Those units without resources must rely on augmentation from within the intelligence enterprise for intelligence. Although the focus is normally on tactical intelligence, the Army draws on both strategic and operational intelligence resources. Each intelligence discipline and complimentary intelligence capability provides the commander with technical capabilities and sensors. Because of the capabilities and characteristics of intelligence operations, these capabilities and sensors require guidance through technical channels. The Army’s intelligence disciplines that contribute to intelligence operations are—  Counterintelligence.  Geospatial intelligence. Chapter 1 1-14 FM 3-55 3 May 2013  Human intelligence.  Measurement and signature intelligence.  Open-source intelligence  Signals intelligence.  Technical intelligence. 1-83. The Army’s complementary intelligence capabilities that contribute to intelligence operations are—  Biometrics-enabled intelligence.  Cyber-enabled intelligence.  Document and media exploitation.  Forensics-enabled intelligence. 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 2-1 Chapter 2 Commander and Staff Roles and Responsibilities This chapter examines the roles, needs, and guidance of the commander in information collection activities. This chapter then discusses the role of the staff. Lastly, this chapter discusses the working group’s input to information collection. THE COMMANDER’S ROLE 2-1. Commanders understand, visualize, describe, direct, lead, and assess operations. Understanding is fundamental to the commander’s ability to establish the situation’s context. Understanding involves analyzing and understanding the operational or mission variables in a given operational environment. It is derived from applying judgment to the common operational picture (COP) through the filter of the commander’s knowledge and experience. 2-2. Numerous factors determine the commander’s depth of understanding. Information collection and the resulting intelligence products help the commander understand the area of operations (AO). Formulating commander’s critical information requirements (CCIRs) and keeping them current also contributes to this understanding. Maintaining understanding is a dynamic ability; a commander’s situational understanding changes as an operation progresses. 2-3. The commander participates in information collection planning. The commander directs information collection activities by—  Asking the right questions to focus the efforts of the staff.  Knowing the enemy. Personal involvement and knowledge have no substitutes.  Stating the commander’s intent clearly and decisively designating CCIRs.  Understanding the information collection assets and resources to exploit the assets’ full effectiveness. 2-4. Commanders prioritize collection activities by providing their guidance and commander’s intent early in the planning process. Commanders must—  Identify and update CCIRs.  Tie CCIRs directly to the scheme of maneuver and decision points.  Limit CCIRs to only the commander’s most critical needs (because of limited collection assets).  Aggressively seek higher echelons’ collection of, and answers to, the information requirements.  Ensure CCIRs include the latest time information is of value (LTIOV) or the event by which the information is required. 2-5. The commander may also identify essential elements of friendly information (EEFI). The EEFI are not CCIRs. EEFI establish friendly information to protect and not enemy information to obtain. However, the commander may need to determine if the enemy has learned EEFI. In this case, finding this out can become a CCIR. (See ADRP 5-0 for detailed information on EEFI.) 2-6. Commanders ensure that both intelligence preparation of the battlefield (IPB) and information collection planning are integrated staff efforts. Every staff member plays an important role in both tasks. The chief of staff or executive officer ensures all staff members participate in and provide their functional expertise into the IPB process and information collection planning, preparation, execution, and assessment. Full staff engagement in these activities supports planning and helps facilitate the commander’s visualization and understanding. 2-7. Information collection planning and assessment must be continuous. Commanders properly assign information collection tasks based on the unit’s abilities to collect. Therefore, commanders match their information requirements so they do not exceed the information collection and analytical ability of their unit. When not using organic assets, commanders use habitual relationships to optimize effective operations as a combined arms team when possible. Chapter 2 2-2 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 2-8. Commanders assess operations and ensure collection activities provide the information needed. Timely reporting to the right analytical element at the right echelon is critical to information collection activities. Commanders continuously assess operations during the planning, preparation, and execution activities. The commander’s involvement and interaction enable the operations and intelligence officers to effectively assess and update collection activities. The commander’s own assessment of the current situation and progress of the operation provides insight to new information needed and information no longer required. The commander communicates this to the staff to help them update CCIRs. Commanders should use regularly scheduled staff assessments (for example, end of phase assessments) to update information collection guidance and increase their own understanding of the situation. Every echelon works together and tailors the intelligence enterprise. This removes information sharing barriers. THE COMMANDER’S NEEDS 2-9. Staffs synchronize and integrate information collection activities with the warfighting functions based on the higher commander’s guidance and decisions. Commanders’ knowledge of collection activities enables them to focus the staff and subordinate commanders in planning, preparing, executing, and assessing information collection activities for the operation. 2-10. Commanders must understand the overall concept of operations from higher headquarters to determine specified and implied tasks and information requirements. There are a finite number of assets and resources for information collection activities. Commanders communicate this as guidance for planners and the staff. Commanders must visualize how multiple collection components work together and understand how their unit’s activities fit into and contribute to those of higher, adjacent, and lower echelons. 2-11. Extended AOs, the necessity to conduct missions and develop information and intelligence over large areas, and extended time spans can surpass the organic capabilities of a unit. Commanders coordinate with many agencies and organizations in the AO so the unit can perform information collection activities. Terminology is essential to this coordination. Commanders ensure civilians and organizations understand terminology and provide or request clarification as needed. Commanders should gain a working knowledge of joint and multinational vocabulary and ways of operating. They should also know about the roles and contributions of other organizations to better communicate and leverage resources. THE COMMANDER’S GUIDANCE 2-12. Commanders plan by providing guidance. This should include guidance for collection assets and required information. Commanders consider risks and provide guidance to the staff on an acceptable level of risk for information collection planning. The commander issues formal guidance at three points in the process:  Commander’s initial guidance following receipt of mission.  Initial planning guidance following mission analysis to guide course of action (COA) development.  Refined commander’s intent, CCIRS, and EEFI after the COA decision but before the final warning order. 2-13. See figure 2-6 in ADRP 5-0 to review all key inputs, steps, and key outputs of the MDMP. COMMANDER’S INITIAL GUIDANCE 2-14. After a unit receives a mission, the commander issues initial guidance. The initial guidance accomplishes several things. It—  Begins the visualization process by identifying the tactical problem (the first step to problem solving).  Defines the AO. This presents a COP for the commander and staff to see the terrain, including the populace.  Develops the initial commander’s intent, specifically key tasks (including tasks for reconnaissance), decisive point, and end state. Commander and Staff Roles and Responsibilities 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 2-3  Lists challenges and initial CCIRs. Challenges include any guidance for staff sections.  Results in the warning order. 2-15. For information collection planning, the initial guidance includes—  Initial timeline for information collection planning.  Initial information collection focus.  Initial information requirements.  Authorized movement.  Collection and product development timeline. 2-16. The initial warning order can alert information collection assets to begin collection activities. If this is the case, the initial warning order includes—  Named areas of interest (NAIs) covered.  Collection tasks and information requirements collected.  Precise guidance on infiltration method, reporting criteria and timelines, fire support, and casualty evacuation plan. INITIAL PLANNING GUIDANCE 2-17. The commander issues the commander’s planning guidance during the mission analysis step of the MDMP, following the approval of the restated mission and mission analysis brief. Part of the commander’s planning guidance is directly related to collection activities—the initial CCIRs and information collection guidance. The guidance for planning should contain sufficient information for the operations officer to complete a draft information collection plan. As a minimum, the commander’s planning guidance includes—  Current CCIRs.  Focus and tempo.  Engagement criteria.  Acceptable risk to assets. 2-18. The commander issues the initial commander’s intent with the commander’s planning guidance. The staff verifies the draft information collection plan synchronizes with the commander’s initial intent and assesses any ongoing information collection activities. The staff recommends changes to support the commander’s intent, CCIRs, and concept of operations. REFINED COMMANDER’S INTENT, CCIRS, AND EEFI 2-19. After the decision briefing, the commander determines a COA the unit follows and issues final planning guidance. Final planning guidance includes—  Any new CCIRs, including the LTIOV.  Rehearsals. THE STAFF’S ROLE 2-20. The staff must function as a single, cohesive unit. Effective staff members know their respective responsibilities and duties. They are also familiar with the responsibilities and duties of other staff members. (See ATTP 5-0.1 for staff duties and responsibilities.) Other coordinating staff members’ information collection responsibilities include helping develop the information collection plan and annexes. 2-21. The chief of staff or executive officer directs the efforts of coordinating and special staff officers, integrates and synchronizes plans and orders, and supervises management of the CCIRs. 2-22. The G-2 (S-2) must work with the entire staff to identify collection requirements and implement the information collection plan. The intelligence staff determines collection requirements (based upon inputs from the commander and other staff sections), develops the information collection matrix with input from the staff representatives, and continues to work with the staff planners to develop the information collection Chapter 2 2-4 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 plan. The G-2 (S-2) also identifies those intelligence assets and resources that provide answers to the CCIRs. 2-23. The G-2X (S-2X) (hereafter referred to as the 2X) is the doctrinal term for the counterintelligence and human intelligence staff officer who works directly for the G-2 (S-2). The term also refers to the staff section led by the 2X. The 2X manages counterintelligence and human intelligence operations to support the overall unit operation. The 2X section works with the G-2 (S-2) in information collection planning and assessing, taking developed counterintelligence and human intelligence requirements and identifying the proper assets to answer the requirements. This information helps develop requirement planning tools and the overall collection plan. 2-24. The G-3 (S-3) is the primary information collection tasking and directing staff officer in the unit, tasking the organic and assigned assets for execution. The G-3 (S-3) collaboratively develops the information collection plan and ensures it synchronizes with the operation plan. 2-25. The other members of the staff support the operations process. Through the planning process, staffs develop requirements, including CCIRs, and put those into the information collection plan. Staffs also monitor the situation and progress of the operation towards the commander’s desired goal. Staffs also prepare running estimates and continuously assess how new information impacts conducting operations. They update running estimates and determine if adjustments to the operation are required. Through this process, the staffs ensure that the information collection plan remains updated as the situation changes, the requirements are answered, or new requirements are developed. 2-26. Staff members consider the following when supporting the information collection planning and execution:  Nature of the mission. Offensive, defensive, and stability or defense support of civil authorities operations have different requirements, timeframes, rules of engagement, and other differences. These differences influence information staffs require to provide recommendations or decisions. Unit movements before an operation begins may require a route reconnaissance.  Terrain and weather. Environments (urban, mountain, jungle, and desert), the size of the operational area, trafficability, and severe weather conditions affect when and how assets are deployed and may degrade sensor capabilities. Additionally, terrain management for asset locations is a staff responsibility when creating the information collection plan.  Higher commander’s intent and guidance. The commander’s intent and guidance may specify the initiation of collection activities or may leave leeway for subordinate commanders and staffs. Staffs determine how information collection activities support the commander’s visualization expressed in the commander’s intent.  The known and unknown of the enemy and environment. The commander determines the criticality of the information identified through CCIRs, which include the LTIOV. The information required drives the collection timeframe. The staff recommends requirements as part of the CCIR development process, ensuring that requirements remain current with the situation and ongoing operations.  Risk to collection assets. Using the risk management process, commanders include acceptable risk to collection assets in their guidance. This may preclude the use or early use of some types of assets. For example, a long-range surveillance company may be available, but the nature of the terrain and the enemy may dictate the use of a less vulnerable asset.  Rules of engagement that affect information collection activities.These may include limitations on where or when aircraft may fly, the use of tracked vehicles in urban areas, protection measures, surveillance of U.S. citizens (in defense support of civil authorities), and other restrictions that affect information collection activities.  Need for operations security. Staffs balance the need for information with the need to avoid revealing intentions by conducting information collection activities. Operations security may dictate selection of assets, such as an airborne asset instead of ground reconnaissance asset, or the use of military deception instead of these assets. Commander and Staff Roles and Responsibilities 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 2-5  Support for friendly military deception operations. Information collection activities can support friendly deception operations by causing the enemy to predict friendly intentions based on the reconnaissance and surveillance efforts the enemy observes.  Available assets. The availability, capabilities, and limitations of assets influence decisions on when and how to deploy them.  Enemy counterreconnaissance. Staffs remain cognizant of the nature of the enemy’s counterreconnaissance intentions and capabilities and plan to defeat or avoid them. THE WORKING GROUP’S INPUT TO INFORMATION COLLECTION 2-27. A working group is a grouping of predetermined staff representatives who meet to provide analysis and recommendations for a particular purpose or function. Working groups are cross-functional by design to synchronize the contributions of multiple command posts’ cells and staff sections. 2-28. A board is a grouping of predetermined staff representatives with delegated decision authority for a particular purpose or function. Boards are similar to working groups. However, commanders appoint boards to arrive at a decision. When the process or activity requires command approval, a board is the appropriate forum. 2-29. A battle rhythm is a deliberate cycle of command, staff, and unit activities intended to synchronize current and future operations. A headquarters’ battle rhythm consists of a series of meetings, briefings, and other activities synchronized by time and purpose. The chief of staff or executive officer oversees the battle rhythm. Each meeting, including working groups and boards, are logically sequenced so that one meeting‘s outputs are available as another meeting‘s inputs (including higher headquarters meetings). OPERATIONS AND INTELLIGENCE WORKING GROUP 2-30. At division and higher echelons, there are dedicated cells responsible for information collection planning. At battalion and brigade, there are no designated cells for information collection planning. The operations and intelligence staffs provide this function. Depending on the availability of personnel, the commander may choose to designate an ad hoc group referred to as an operations and intelligence working group. Because the primary staff officers’ responsibilities are not delegated, the chief of staff or executive officer should direct and manage the efforts of this working group to achieve a fully synchronized and integrated information collection plan. 2-31. Unit standard operating procedures (SOPs) and battle rhythms determine how frequently an operations and intelligence working group meets. This working group should align with both the current operations and future operations (or plans) cells to ensure requirements planning tools are properly integrated into the overall operations plan. These planning tools should also be in the concepts for plans. 2-32. The operations and intelligence working group is a temporary grouping of designated staff representatives who coordinate and integrate information collection activity and provide recommendations to the commander. This group ensures maximum efficiency in information collection by carefully employing all the collection tasks or missions together in the information collection plan. This helps satisfy several requirements and ensures the operations and intelligence working group does not favor or become too reliant on one particular unit, discipline, or system. The working group usually includes, at a minimum, the following representatives:  Chief of staff or executive officer.  G-3 (S-3) (alternate chair) or representative.  Engineer coordinator representative.  Air defense airspace management or brigade aviation element representative.  G-2 (S-2) or representative.  G-2X (S-2X) or representative.  Military intelligence company commander or representative.  Reconnaissance squadron S-3, S-2, the S-3 and S-2, or a representative.  G-2X (S-2X) or representative. Chapter 2 2-6 FM 3-55 3 May 2013  Fire support officer or representative.  G-7 (S-7) or representative.  Signal officer or representative.  Electronic warfare officer.  G-9 (S-9) or representative.  Chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) officer.  Sustainment cell representative.  Subordinate unit representatives (if available).  Special operations forces representative (if available).  Legal representative (if available). 2-33. The working group brings staff sections together. The staff sections validate requirements and deconflict organic and attached collection assets’ missions and taskings. Input is required from each member of the working group. The output of the working group is validation of outputs. This includes the following:  Understand how the enemy is going to fight.  Refine the list of requirements.  Confirm the final disposition of all collection assets.  Review friendly force information requirements, priority intelligence requirements (PIRs), and EEFI.  Validate outputs of other working groups (for example, fusion and targeting working groups).  Review and establish critical NAIs and target areas of interest (TAIs). 2-34. The working group meeting is a critical event. Staffs must integrate it effectively into the unit battle rhythm to ensure the collection effort provides focus to operations rather than disrupting them. Preparation and focus are essential to a successful working group. All representatives, at a minimum, must come to the meeting prepared to discuss available assets, capabilities, limitations, and requirements related to their functions. Planning the working group’s battle rhythm is paramount to conducting effective information collection operations. Staffs schedule the working group cycle to complement the higher headquarters’ battle rhythm and its subsequent requirements and timelines. 2-35. The G-3 (S-3) (or representative) comes prepared to provide the following:  The current friendly situation.  Current CCIRs.  The availability of collection assets.  Requirements from higher headquarters (including recent fragmentary orders or taskings).  Changes to the commander’s intent.  Changes to the task organization.  Planned operations. 2-36. The G-2 (S-2) (or representative) comes prepared to provide the following:  The current enemy situation.  The current information collection priorities and strategies.  Current requirements planning tools.  The situational template tailored to the time discussed.  Support from resources the G-2 (S-2) must request from higher headquarters.  Weather and effects of weather on intelligence collection, reconnaissance, and surveillance. 2-37. Table 2-1 describes an example for the operations and intelligence working group. Commander and Staff Roles and Responsibilities 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 2-7 Table 2-1. Example of the operations and intelligence working group Purpose: To synchronize information collection with operations, determine current requirements and make full use of all available assets to meet the commander’s intent and requirements. Frequency: Twice weekly. Duration: 30 to 45 minutes. Location: To be determined. Staff Proponent: G-2 (S-2) Chair: Deputy commander Attendees: Primary staff sections, fires officer, G-2X (S-2X), brigade or battalion liaison officers, and Air Force liaison officer. Inputs: • Command group guidance. • Area of operations update. • CCIRs update. • Future operations requirements. • Subordinate unit requirements. • Targeting requirements. • Air tasking order nomination. Outputs: • Priorities and recommendations for latest information collection plan. • Latest scrub of the commander’s critical information requirements. • Fragmentary order input. Agenda: • Command group guidance review. • Area of operations review. • Past information collection plan review. • Weather. • Future operations requirements. • Subordinate unit requirements. • Targeting requirements. • Allocation of collection resources and assets availability. • Issues review. • Summary. • Closing comments. FUSION WORKING GROUP 2-38. Typically, brigade and above form a fusion working group. This working group refines and fuses the intelligence between the command and its subordinate units. The output of this working group provides the intelligence staff with refinements to the situation template and the event template. The working group also refines existing PIRs and recommends new PIRs to the operations and intelligence working group. Additionally, the working group reviews requirements to ensure currency. TARGETING WORKING GROUP 2-39. The targeting working group synchronizes the unit’s targeting assets and priorities. For the staff, supporting the planning for the decide, detect, deliver, and assess (known as D3A) activities of the targeting process requires continuous update of IPB products (such as situation templates and COA matrixes). The targeting working group considers targeting related collection and exploitation requirements. It also recommends additional requirements to the operations and intelligence working group. Staffs articulate these requirements early in the targeting process to support target development and other assessments. 2-40. Information collection support to target development takes D3A methodology and applies this to the development of targets. Units using other targeting techniques—such as find, fix, finish, exploit, analyze, and disseminate (known as F3EAD) or find, fix, track, target, engage, and assess—require no adaptation to the information collection support to targeting process. Nominations for request to current and future tasking orders as well as refinements to the high-value target lists are outputs of this working group. 2-41. The results of these working groups form the basis of the requests for information collection and products the intelligence staff uses to create requirements planning tools. The operations staff integrates these tools in the creation of the information collection plan. This page intentionally left blank. 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 3-1 Chapter 3 Information Collection Planning and Assessment This chapter describes information collection planning considerations. It then discusses personnel recovery support. Next, this chapter discusses the military decisionmaking process and information collection. Lastly, this chapter discusses information collection assessment. INFORMATION COLLECTION PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS 3-1. Commanders direct information collection activities by approving commander’s critical information requirements (CCIRs) and through driving the operations process. The success of information collection is measured by its contribution to the commander’s understanding, visualization, and decisionmaking. The operations process and information collection activities are mutually dependent. Commanders provide the guidance and focus that drive both by issuing their commander’s intent and approving CCIRs. The activities of information collection occur during all parts of the operation and provide continuous information to the operations process. 3-2. Throughout the operations process, commanders and staffs use integrating processes to synchronize the warfighting functions to accomplish missions. Information collection activities, as well as intelligence preparation of the battlefield (IPB), are among these integrating processes. Synchronization is the arrangement of military actions in time, space, and purpose to produce maximum relative combat power at a decisive place and time (JP 2-0). This collaborative effort by the staff, with the commander’s involvement, is essential to synchronize information collection with the overall operation. Planning, preparing, executing, and assessing information collection activities is a continuous cycle with a timeframe that depends on the echelon, assets engaged, and the type of operation. For example, offensive operations have a significantly shorter timeframe for gathering information and expecting to see changes in the situation than stability operations. 3-3. Conducting information collection activities consists of various staff functions such as planning, collection, processing, and exploitation; analysis and production; dissemination and integration; and evaluation and feedback. It should focus on the commander’s requirements. The purpose of these staff functions is to place all collection assets and resources into a single plan to capitalize on the different capabilities. The plan synchronizes and coordinates collection activities in the overall scheme of maneuver. A good information collection plan fits into and supports the overall operations plan or order (see table A-1 on page A-7 for an example). It positions and tasks collection assets to collect the right information, sustain or reconstitute for branches or sequels, or shift priorities as the situation develops. Effective information collection focuses on answering the commander’s requirements through collection tasks translated into orders. 3-4. The information collection plan synchronizes activities of the information collection assets to provide intelligence to the commander required to confirm course of action (COA) selection and targeting requirements. The intelligence staff, in coordination with the operations staff, ensures all available collection assets provide the required information. The staff also recommends adjustments to asset locations, if required. 3-5. An effective information collection plan must be based on the initial threat assessment and modified as the intelligence running estimate changes. Other staff sections’ running estimates may contain requirements to include in the information collection plan. Additionally, the plan must synchronize with the scheme of maneuver and be updated as that scheme of maneuver changes. Properly synchronized information collection planning begins when the IPB (threat characteristics, enemy templates, enemy COA statements, and, most importantly, an enemy event template or matrix) is developed and updated. Properly synchronized information collection planning ends with well-defined CCIRs and collection strategies based on the situation and commander’s intent. Chapter 3 3-2 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 PERSONNEL RECOVERY SUPPORT 3-6. Personnel recovery support consists of the staff activities and unit capabilities focused on collecting information to recover and return their own personnel—whether Soldier, Army civilian, selected Department of Defense contractors, or other personnel as determined by the Secretary of Defense—who are isolated, missing, detained, or captured in an area of operations (AO). This support also includes developing detailed analysis, detailed products, and running estimates to defense support of civil authorities undertaken to recover isolated, missing, detained, or captured personnel. THE MDMP AND INFORMATION COLLECTION PLANNING 3-7. Information collection planning is in the military decisionmaking process (MDMP) and depends extensively on all staff members thoroughly completing the IPB process. Information collection planning starts with receipt of the mission (which could be a warning order). Information collection directly supports the development of intelligence and operations products used throughout the decisionmaking process. Within the MDMP, the staff must prepare certain products used during the plan and prepare activities of the operations process. 3-8. Information collection activities are continuous, collaborative, and interactive. Several of the outputs from the MDMP require the collaboration of the staff, especially the intelligence and operations staffs. The information collection plan is not developed without constant coordination among the entire staff. At every step in the MDMP, the intelligence staff must rely on input from the entire staff and cooperate with the operations staff to develop information collection products that support the commander’s intent and maximize collection efficiency for each course of action under consideration. Information collection planning inputs and outputs during the MDMP are highlighted in paragraphs 3-9 through 3-56. (See ADRP 5-0 for more information on the MDMP.) RECEIPT OF MISSION 3-9. Before receipt of the mission, the intelligence staff develops intelligence knowledge. In addition to the knowledge already available, the intelligence staff uses intelligence reach and requests additional information from higher headquarters to fill the information gaps in the initial intelligence estimate. The intelligence staff should identify and tap into any ongoing or existing information collection activities or joint intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance collection that offers relevant information to fill gaps. 3-10. The commander and staff shift their efforts to describing the operational environment using mission variables when a mission is received. The commander and staff also begin preparations for the MDMP. Commanders provide their initial guidance to the staff. The staff uses it to develop the initial information collection tasks to units and transmits it as part of the first warning order. Commanders state the critical information required for the area of operations in their guidance. Expressed in later steps of the MDMP, these requirements identify the critical pieces of information for the commander to successfully plan, prepare, execute, and assess operations. 3-11. During the receipt of mission step, the staff gathers tools needed for the MDMP, begins the intelligence estimate, updates running estimates, and performs an initial assessment of the time available to subordinate units for planning, preparation, and execution.Since information collection assets are required early, the staff needs sufficient preparation time to begin sending information that the commander needs. 3-12. The information collection outputs from this step include—  The commander’s initial information collection guidance.  Intelligence reach tasks.  Requests for information to higher headquarters.  Directions for accessing ongoing or existing information collection activities or joint intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance.  The first warning order with initial information collection tasks. Information Collection Planning and Assessment 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 3-3 MISSION ANALYSIS 3-13. When mission analysis begins, the staff should have the higher headquarters plan or order all available products. The staff adds its updated running estimates to the process. The initial information collection tasks issued with the first warning order may yield information for analysis and evaluation for relevance to mission analysis. The commander provides initial guidance that the staff uses to capture the commander’s intent and develop the restated mission. Analyze the Higher Headquarters Order 3-14. During mission analysis, the staff analyzes the higher headquarters order to extract information collection tasks and constraints such as limits of reconnaissance. The order also contains details on the availability of information collection assets from higher echelons and any allocation of those assets to the unit. Perform Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield 3-15. IPB is one of the most important prerequisites to information collection planning. During IPB, staffs develop several key products that aid information collection planning. Those products include—  Threat characteristics.  Terrain overlays.  The weather effects matrix.  Enemy situational templates and COA statements.  The enemy event template and matrix.  The high-payoff target list.  An updated intelligence estimate including identified information gaps. 3-16. These products aid the staff in identifying—  Information gaps answered by existing collection activities, intelligence reach, and requests for information to higher echelons. The remaining information gaps develop requirements for information collection.  Threat considerations that may affect planning.  Terrain effects that may benefit, constrain, or limit the capabilities of collection assets.  Weather effects that may benefit, constrain, or negatively influence the capabilities of collection assets.  Civil considerations that may affect information collection planning. Note: When considering terrain effects, planners can use the geospatial information team to develop line-of-sight products. 3-17. The most useful product for information collection planning for the intelligence officer is the threat event template. Once developed, the threat event template helps develop the information collection plan. Likely threat locations, avenues of approach, infiltration routes, support areas, and areas of activity become named areas of interest (NAIs) or target areas of interest (TAIs) where collection assets focus their collection efforts. Indicators, coupled with information requirements and essential elements of friendly information (EEFI), provide collection assets with the required information that units identify and report. (See chapters 1 and 2 of FM 2-01.3 for additional information on the IPB process and products.) 3-18. As the staff completes mission analysis, the intelligence staff completes development of initial collection requirements. These collection requirements form the basis of the initial information collection plan, the requests for collection support, and the requests for information to higher and lateral units. When the mission analysis is complete, staffs have identified intelligence gaps and planners have an initial plan to fill those gaps. Additionally, the operations officer and the remainder of the staff thoroughly understand the unit missions, tasks, and purposes. Chapter 3 3-4 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Determine Specified, Implied, and Essential Tasks 3-19. The staff also identifies specified, implied, and essential information collection tasks. Specified tasks are directed towards subordinate units, systems, sensors, and Soldiers. Implied tasks determine how a system or sensor is initialized for collection. Essential information collection tasks are derived from specified and implied tasks. These tasks are the focus of the information collection effort. Review Available Assets 3-20. The staff must review all available collection assets and create an inventory of capabilities to apply against collection requirements. Building the inventory of assets and resources begins with annex A of the higher headquarters order. The staff takes those assets attached or under operational control of the unit and adds those resources available from higher echelons and those belonging to adjacent units that may help. The higher headquarters order should specify temporary or permanent operating locations and the air tasking order details for aerial assets. 3-21. While reviewing the available collection assets, the staff evaluates the collection assets according to their capability and availability. First, the staff measures the capabilities of the collection assets. They must know and address the practical capabilities and limitations of all unit organic assets. Capabilities include—  Range.  Day and night effectiveness.  Technical characteristics.  Reporting timeliness.  Geolocation accuracy.  Durability.  Threat activity.  Sustainability.  Vulnerability.  Performance history. 3-22. Range deals with the collector’s ability to provide target coverage. It is important to consider mission range (duration and distance) and the distance of the collection asset from the target. In addition, intelligence staffs consider the communications requirements from the asset to the controlling headquarters.  What is the asset’s effective range to observe target activity?  What is the asset’s ability to move and maneuver including travel and support times?  If the best asset is an unmanned aircraft system, what it the range of the aircraft?  What is the flight time duration? How far is the preplanned coverage area from the aircraft launch locations? 3-23. Day and night effectiveness is the collector’s ability to collect information in varying degrees of light. Some collection sensors are designed for nighttime or limited visibility conditions, while some sensors cannot operate at night or with limited visibility.  Is the asset capable of conducting collection during the hours of darkness and low visibility?  How does thermal crossover affect the asset’s capabilities? 3-24. Technical characteristics address the capabilities and limitations of the collector’s resources. Urban environments degrade some capabilities of collection sensors. Weather effects on sensors must be considered. Collectors consider the time factors each asset requires for task performance.  Can the sensor see through obscurants?  What are the effects of the environment (including such factors as urban or rural terrain and soil composition) on the collection asset?  Can the sensor continue despite hostile electronic attack?  Can the aircraft launch in high winds or limited visibility?  Can the prime mover cross restricted terrain? Information Collection Planning and Assessment 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 3-5 3-25. Reporting timeliness deals with the collector’s promptness for reporting. Some collection assets require additional processing time to convert data into a useable format.  What are the established reporting criteria for each collection asset?  How long does it take a collector to disseminate collected information to the requestor? 3-26. Geolocation accuracy discusses the collector’s ability to identify exact locations. Targeting requirements and rules of engagement may require greater geolocational accuracy. Accuracy implies reliability and precision.  How accurate is the locational data provided by the asset?  Is the asset capable of providing locational accuracy required for precision guided munitions? 3-27. Durability addresses the stability and endurance of the materials used by collectors.  Can the aircraft launch in high winds or limited visibility?  Can the prime mover cross restricted terrain? 3-28. Threat activity deals with how much enemy activity the collector identifies. Can the collection system obtain and report the threat conducting activities? 3-29. Sustainability addresses the length of time a collector can use an asset without additional resources. Each collection asset has distinct sustainment requirements; therefore, the staff must consider the collection asset’s sustainability for long duration operations. The longer the collection period, the harder it will be to find assets for continuous activity. Weather can significantly affect sustainability of certain collection assets. 3-30. Vulnerability includes the collector’s vulnerability to threat forces, not only in the target area but also along the entire route of travel. Collectors evaluate their vulnerability to threat forces. Collectors consider the threat’s ability to locate, identify, and destroy them anywhere their collection mission might take them.  What is the threat’s ability to locate, identify, and destroy the collection asset?  Is the collection asset or sensor vulnerable to threat denial and deception? 3-31. Performance history covers the known reliability of collection assets. Experienced staffs know which collection assets they can rely on to meet the commander’s requirements. Readiness rates, responsiveness, and accuracy over time may raise one collector’s reliability factor. Certain sensors require confirmation, especially if targeting is an issue. 3-32. Staffs evaluate the availability of collection assets and know the collectors and processors available at their own echelon and echelons above and below. Staffs also know how to access those assets and resources. Theater and joint echelons apportion joint intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance assets to subordinate echelons. Corps and divisions allocate support from the apportioned amount they receive to brigade combat teams (BCTs) and below. Staffs understand the system of apportionment and allocation to determine what is available and what to request. Staffs do this by analyzing the higher headquarters order and reviewing the various scheduling or tracking mechanisms. Note: Military source operations take time to establish and cultivate. Human intelligence collection availability and responsiveness links to geographic access, support relationships, protection restrictions, and workload. (See FM 2-22. 3 and TC 2-22.303 for more information on military source and human intelligence.) Signals intelligence assets are also valuable collection assets in stability operations when properly focused and supported through all-source intelligence analysis. Staffs employ signals intelligence collection with another collection asset. This mix of coverage allows signals intelligence collectors to cue and be cued by other collection assets. 3-33. Certain capabilities require confirmation, especially if targeting is an issue. For example, target selection standards may require the staff to rely on systems capable of providing targeting accuracy. If experience shows that a particular system is often unavailable because of local weather patterns, the staff considers this in evaluating the system’s performance history. The staff may select an alternate system. Chapter 3 3-6 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Determine Constraints 3-34. When determining constraints, the staff considers legal, political, operational, and rules of engagement constraints that might constrain reconnaissance, security, intelligence operations, and surveillance. The staff must consider planning constraints such as limits of reconnaissance, earliest time information is of value, and not earlier than times. In some cases, the commander may impose constraints on using certain collection assets. In other cases, system constraints such as the weather, crew rest, or maintenance cycle limitations may impose limits the staff must consider. Identify Critical Facts and Assumptions 3-35. When staffs identify critical facts and assumptions, they identify critical facts and assumptions pertinent to information collection planning that they will use later in COA development. For example, a critical fact might be that imagery requests may take 72 to 96 hours to fulfill or that the human intelligence effort requires significant time before a good source network is fully developed. 3-36. Developing assumptions for planning include the availability and responsiveness of organic assets and resources from higher echelons. For example, the staff might use a certain percentage (representing hours) of unmanned aircraft system support available on a daily basis, weather and maintenance permitting. Perform Risk Assessment 3-37. When performing a risk assessment, the staff considers the asset’s effectiveness versus the protection requirements and risk to the asset. For example, placing a sensor forward enough on the battlefield that it can return valuable data and information may put the asset at high risk of being compromised, captured, or destroyed. The calculus of payoff versus loss will always be determined by mission variables and the commander’s decision. 3-38. In some cases, friendly forces may reveal a collection capability by taking certain actions. If it is important to keep a collection capability concealed, then the staff carefully considers every lethal or nonlethal action based on current intelligence. Determine Initial CCIRs and EEFI 3-39. Determining initial CCIRs and EEFI is the most important prerequisite for information collection planning. The staff refines the list of requirements they derive from the initial analysis of information available and from intelligence gaps identified during IPB. They base this list on higher headquarters tasks, commander’s guidance, staff assessments, and subordinate and adjacent unit requests for information. 3-40. The staff then nominates these requirements to the commander to be CCIRs and EEFI. Commanders alone decide what information is critical based on their experience, the mission, the higher commander’s intent, and input from the staff. The CCIRs are the primary focus for information collection activities. Develop the Initial Information Collection Plan 3-41. The initial information plan is crucial to begin or adjust the collection effort to help answer requirements necessary to develop effective plans. The initial information collection plan sets information collection in motion. Staffs may issue it as part of a warning order, a fragmentary order, or an operation order. As more information becomes available, staffs incorporate it into a complete information plan to the operation order. 3-42. At this point in the MDMP, the initial information plan has to be generic because the staffs still must develop friendly COAs. The basis for the plan is the commander’s initial information collection guidance, the primary information gaps identified by the staff during mission analysis, and the enemy situational template developed during IPB. (See chapter 4 for additional information on tasking and directing collection assets.) Information Collection Planning and Assessment 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 3-7 3-43. The intelligence staff creates the requirements management tools for the information collection plan. The operations staff is responsible for the information collection plan. During this step, the operations and intelligence staff work closely to ensure they fully synchronize and integrate information collection activities into the overall plan. 3-44. The operations officer considers several factors when developing the initial information collection plan, including—  Requirements for collection assets in subsequent missions.  The time available to develop and refine the initial information collection plan.  The risk the commander is willing to accept if information collection missions begin before the information collection plan is fully integrated into the scheme of maneuver.  Insertion and extraction methods for reconnaissance, security, surveillance, and intelligence units.  Contingencies for inclement weather to ensure coverage of key NAIs or TAIs.  The communications plan for transmission of reports from assets to tactical operations centers.  The inclusion of collection asset locations and movements into the fire support plan.  The reconnaissance handover with higher or subordinate echelons.  The sustainment support.  Legal support requirements. Develop Requests for Information and Requests for Collection or Support 3-45. Submitting a request for information to the next higher or lateral echelon is a method for obtaining information not available with organic information collection assets. Units enter requests for information into a system where all units can see requests. Hence, analysts several echelons above the actual requester become aware of the request and may be able to answer it. 3-46. When the unit cannot satisfy a collection requirement with its own assets, the intelligence staff composes and submits a request for information to the next higher echelon (or lateral units) for integration in its own information collection plan. At each echelon, the requirement is validated and a determination made if that echelon can satisfy the requirement. If that echelon cannot satisfy the requirement, it is passed to the next higher echelon. Note: This process continues until the requirement is satisfied and the information or intelligence requirement is no longer needed or cannot be satisfied. 3-47. Throughout the request for information process, units must apprise the submitting organization of the status of their request for information as either accepted for action, passed to another organization for action, returned without action (invalid or impracticable request), or closed (satisfied).For the priority intelligence requirement (PIR), the intelligence staff tracks all production requirements, particularly those transmitted to higher echelons. When a requirement is satisfied or overcome by events, intelligence officers must notify the higher headquarters that the requirement is closed. Develop and Synchronize Production Requirements 3-48. Intelligence staffs develop and synchronize production requirements to provide timely and relevant intelligence analysis and products to commanders, staff, and subordinate forces. Staffs use the unit’s battle rhythm as a basis for determining the daily, weekly, and monthly analytical products. The intelligence staff then designs an analytical and production effort to answer the CCIRs and meet the commander’s need for situational understanding and the staff’s need for situational awareness. 3-49. Intelligence production includes analyzing information and intelligence. It also includes presenting intelligence products, assessments, conclusions, or projections regarding the area of operations and threat forces in a format that helps the commander achieve situational understanding. Staffs devote the remainder of the analytical effort to processing, analyzing, and disseminating data and information. Chapter 3 3-8 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 3-50. Commanders and staffs measure the success of the analytical and production effort by the products provided and their ability to answer or satisfy the CCIRs, intelligence requirements, and information requirements. COURSE OF ACTION DEVELOPMENT 3-51. Using the continually updated IPB products and the enemy situation template, the intelligence staff must integrate information collection considerations to develop friendly COAs. In many cases, the information collection considerations for each COA are similar depending on the characteristics of the friendly COA. 3-52. The operations and intelligence staffs must collaborate on information collection considerations to support each course of action developed. The staff works to integrate its available resources into an integrated plan. Intelligence and operations staffs focus on the relationship of collection assets to other friendly forces, the terrain and weather, and the enemy. 3-53. The development of NAIs and TAIs based upon suspected enemy locations drive the employment of collection assets. The staff considers how to use asset mix, asset redundancy, and asset cueing to offset the capabilities of the various collection assets. 3-54. During COA development, the staff refines and tailors the initial CCIRs for each COA. Technically, these are initial requirements for each course of action. Later in the MDMP, once a COA is approved, the commander approves the final CCIR, and the staff publishes it. COURSE OF ACTION ANALYSIS (WAR GAME) 3-55. The intelligence staff records the results of COA analysis and uses that information to develop the requirements planning tools. The entire staff uses the action-reaction-counteraction process to move logically through the war gaming process. These events have a bearing on the assets recommended for tasking to the operations staff. ORDERS PRODUCTION, DISSEMINATION, AND TRANSITION 3-56. Orders production is putting the plan into effect and directing units to conduct information collection tasks. The staff prepares the order by turning the selected COA into a clear, concise concept of operations and supporting information. The order provides all the information subordinate commands need to plan and execute their operations. However, this is not the first time subordinate commanders and their staffs have seen this data. In the parallel and collaborative planning process, planners at all echelons are involved in the orders process. INFORMATION COLLECTION ASSESSMENT 3-57. Assessment is the determination of the progress toward accomplishing a task, creating a condition, or achieving an objective (JP 3-0). Assessment guides every operations process activity. Assessing information collection activities enables the operations and intelligence staffs to monitor and evaluate the current situation and progress of the operation. This ensures all collection tasks are completely satisfied in a timely manner. 3-58. Staffs begin assessing information collection task execution with monitoring and reporting by collection assets as they execute their missions. Staffs track reporting to determine how well the information collection assets satisfy their collection tasks. The desired result is relevant information delivered to the commander before the latest time information is of value (LTIOV). 3-59. The running estimate informs the staff of the status of collection on all requirements. A running estimate is even more effective when staffs compare previous ones that refer to the same time. This comparison grades accuracy and relevancy of the prediction to what actually occurred enabling the staff to develop COAs that avoid repeating mistakes. Information Collection Planning and Assessment 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 3-9 3-60. After each phase of the operation, staffs conduct an assessment. They examine the audit trail to determine which requirements were answered and not answered. Afterwards, the operation and intelligence staffs assess the accuracy and effectiveness of the collection assets and analytic elements. (See chapter 5 of ADRP 5-0 for more information on assessment.) This page intentionally left blank. 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 4-1 Chapter 4 Information Collection Tasking and Directing This chapter describes the importance of information collection tasking and directing. It discusses how the staff finalizes the information collection plan and develops the information collection overlay. Lastly, this chapter discusses the development of the information collection scheme of support. IMPORTANCE OF TASKING AND DIRECTING 4-1. The operations staff integrates collection assets through a deliberate and coordinated effort across all warfighting functions. Tasking and directing information collection is vital to control limited collection assets. During tasking and directing information collection, the staff recommends redundancy, mix, and cue as appropriate. Planning information collection activities begins once requirements are established, validated, and prioritized. Staffs accomplish tasking information collection by issuing warning orders, fragmentary orders, and operation orders. They accomplish directing information collection assets by continuously monitoring the operation. Staffs conduct retasking to refine, update, or create new requirements. FINAL INFORMATION COLLECTION PLAN 4-2. To finalize the information collection plan, the staff must complete several important activities and review several considerations to achieve a fully synchronized, efficient, and effective plan. The information collection plan also applies to the rapid decisionmaking and synchronization process. Updating information collection activities during the execution and assessment activities of the operations process is crucial to the successful execution and subsequent adjustments of the information collection plan. The information collection plan is implemented through execution of asset tasking. The tasking process provides the selected collection assets with prioritized requirements. When collection tasks or requests are passed to units, the staff provides details that clearly define the collection requirements. These requirements identify—  What to collect—information requirements and essential elements of information.  Where to collect it—named areas of interest (NAIs) and target areas of interest (TAIs).  When and how long to collect.  Why to collect—answer commander’s critical information requirements (CCIRs). 4-3. The information collection plan is an execution order. It should be published in the five-paragraph operation order format as a warning order, an operation order, or a fragmentary order. Staffs use the information collection plan to task, direct, and manage collection assets (both assigned and attached assets) to collect against the requirements. The operations officer tasks and directs information collection activities. The intelligence staff helps the staff develop the information collection plan by providing the requirement planning tools. (See ATTP 2-01 for additional information on developing planning requirement tools). Staffs—  Integrate the information collection plan into the scheme of maneuver.  Publish annex L (information collection) to the operation order that tasks assets to begin the collection effort.  Ensure the information collection plan addresses all of the commander’s requirements.  Ensure assigned and attached assets have been evaluated and recommended for information collection tasks within their capabilities.  Ensure the collection tasks outside the capabilities of assigned and attached assets have been prepared as requests for information to appropriate higher or lateral headquarters.  Publish any fragmentary orders and warning orders associated with information collection. Chapter 4 4-2 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 4-4. Appendix A contains examples of annex L and an information collection warning order. Figure 4-1 is a sample information collection matrix format to use as an appendix to annex L. (See chapter 3 of ATTP 2-01 for additional information and techniques on completing the information collection matrix.) AO area of operations                                R requests for collection submitted by the intelligence staff to nonorganic assets BCT brigade combat team                           XX organic asset nominated to the operations staff for tasking Approved priority intelligence requirement. Normally one sheet per priority intelligence requirement. Priority intelligence requirement Essential elements of information are a subset of requirements related to and would answer a priority intelligence requirement. Essential elements of information Positive or negative evidence of threat activity or any characteristic of the AO that— • Points toward threat vulnerabilities. • Points toward the adoption or rejection by the threat of a particular activity. • May influence the commander’s selection of a course of action. Indicators Information requirements facilitate tasking by matching requirement to assets. Information requirement Named area of interest Start time End time XX 1st battalion Brigade combat team XX–primary               R–request 2d battalion 3rd battalion Q-36/Q-37 Engineer Low-cost counter-mortar radar Reconnaissance Shadow full motion video BCT human intelligence BCT counterintelligence Prophet R Full motion video Division and higher R Human intelligence R Counterintelligence R Communications intelligence R Imagery intelligence R Moving target indicator Figure 4-1. Sample information collection matrix Information Collection Tasking and Directing 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 4-3 4-5. An information collection plan is the primary means of tasking assets. Staffs can issue this plan as part of the completed operation order; however, the tactical situation may impose a limited time constraint. In such cases, staffs can issue the information collection plan as early as the initial warning order. This gives collection assets time to prepare for information collection activities. Staffs use fragmentary orders to retask assets already conducting operations and to adjust execution as requirements and priorities change. INFORMATION COLLECTION OVERLAY 4-6. The staff may issue an information collection overlay depicting the information collection plan in graphic form as an appendix to annex L to the operation order. Typical items on the overlay include the following:  Friendly boundaries and phase lines.  Reconnaissance handover lines.  NAIs and TAIs.  Limits of advance and limits of reconnaissance. Limits of reconnaissance are constraints derived from higher headquarters orders that may designate a limit of advance that impact reconnaissance units.  Counterreconnaissance areas.  Fire support control measures.  Graphics depicting zone, area, or route reconnaissance.  Route start points, release points, infiltration lanes, and checkpoints.  Primary and alternate observation post locations.  Ambulance exchange points and logistic release points.  Planned or existing obstacles.  Scanned sectors for sensors.  Unmanned aircraft system flight paths.  Retransmission locations. 4-7. Figure 4-2 on page 4-4 displays an example of an information collection overlay. INFORMATION COLLECTION SCHEME OF SUPPORT 4-8. The information collection scheme of support includes the planning and execution of operations and resources to support the Soldiers and units who perform information collection. This support includes fires, movement, protection, and sustainment (logistics, personnel services, health services support, and other sustainment related functions). The staff prepares the initial scheme of support. The operations officer approves the plan and tasks units. Chapter 4 4-4 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Figure 4-2. Example of an information collection overlay 4-9. The staff publishes the scheme of support in annex L. At a minimum, the scheme of support addresses the items shown in table 4-1. Information Collection Tasking and Directing 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 4-5 Table 4-1. Scheme of support Warfighting Functions Items Addressed Movement and maneuver • Provide asset movement routes to and from mission execution location. Fires • Call for fire. • Request immediate attack helicopter support. • Request immediate close air support. Protection • Air defense. Sustainment • Medical evacuation request. • Casualty evacuation request. • Landing zone and pickup zone procedures for rotary-wing aircraft to perform air-ground integration, casualty evacuation, or aerial resupply. • Casualty reporting. • Reconstitution. • Postal and administrative support. • Religious support. • Resupply of classes I, III, and V.
• Field maintenance support, recovery, and evacuation of unserviceable equipment including vehicles, collection platforms, and systems. PROVIDE SUPPORT TO SITE EXPLOITATION 4-10. Site exploitation is systematically searching for and collecting information, material, and persons from a designated location and analyzing them to answer information requirements, facilitate subsequent operations, or support criminal prosecution (ATTP 3-90.15). (See ATTP 3-90.15 for additional information on site exploitation.) 4-11. Site exploitation consists of a related series of activities to exploit personnel, documents, electronic data, and material captured while neutralizing any threat posed by the items or contents. Units conduct site exploitation using one of two techniques: hasty and deliberate. Commanders choose the technique based on time available and the unit’s collection capabilities. MONITOR OPERATIONS 4-12. Staffs track the progress of the operation against the requirements and the information collection plan. The operation seldom progresses on the timelines assumed during planning and staff war gaming. The staff watches for changes in tempo that require changes in reporting times, such as latest time information is of value (LTIOV). The intelligence and operations staffs coordinate any changes with all parties concerned, including commanders and appropriate staff sections. Sometimes the staff’s assumptions about enemy courses of action (COAs) are not correct. This will result in a change in requirements and adjustments to the timelines. Staffs may initiate abbreviated versions of the intelligence preparation of the battlefield (IPB) and decisionmaking processes to accommodate changes in their assumptions. CORRELATE REPORTS TO REQUIREMENTS 4-13. Correlating information reporting to the original requirement and evaluating reports is important for effective requirements management. This quality control effort helps the staff ensure timely satisfaction of requirements. Requirements management includes dissemination of reporting and related information to original requesters and other users. Chapter 4 4-6 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 4-14. To correlate reports, the staff tracks the collection task, where it originates, what the requirement is and ensures those who need the collected information receive it. For efficiency and timeliness, the staff links production tasks to requirements. The staff determines which requirements have been satisfied and which require additional collection. 4-15. The staff addresses the following potential challenges:  Large volumes of information that could inundate the intelligence analysis section. The intelligence staff may have trouble finding the time to correlate each report to a requirement.  Reports that partially satisfy a number of collection tasks. Other reports may have nothing to do with the collection task.  Reported information that fails to refer to the original task that drove collection.  Circular reporting or unnecessary message traffic that wastes valuable time. SCREEN REPORTS 4-16. The staff screens reports to determine whether the collection task has been satisfied. In addition, the staff screens each report for the following criteria:  Relevance. Does the information actually address the tasked collection task? If not, can the staff use this information to satisfy other requirements?  Completeness. Is essential information missing? (Refer to the original collection task.)  Timeliness. Was the asset reported by the LTIOV established in the original task?  Opportunities for cueing. Can this asset or another asset take advantage of new information to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the overall information collection effort? If the report suggests an opportunity to cue other assets, intelligence and operations staffs immediately cue them and record any new requirements in the information collection plan. 4-17. Information collection assets do not submit reports that state nothing significant to report. These reports may convey that collection occurred, but no activity satisfying the information collection task was observed, which may be an indicator.Indicating nothing significant to report is not a reliable indicator of the absence of activity. PROVIDE FEEDBACK 4-18. The staff provides feedback to all collection assets on mission effectiveness and to analytic sections on production. The mission command element of that unit usually provides this feedback. Feedback reinforces whether collection or production satisfies the original task or request and provides guidance if it does not. Feedback is essential to maintain information collection effectiveness and alert leaders of deficiencies to correct. 4-19. As the operation continues, the intelligence and operations staffs track the status of each collection task, analyze reporting, and satisfy requirements. They pay particular attention to assets not producing required results, which may trigger adjustments to the information collection plan. During execution, the staff assesses the value of the information from collection assets and develops and refines requirements to satisfy information gaps. 4-20. When reporting satisfies a requirement, the staff relieves the collection assets of further responsibility to collect against information collection tasks related to the satisfied requirement. The operations officer, in coordination with the intelligence staff, provides additional tasks to satisfy emerging requirements. The operations staff notifies—  Collection assets and their leadership of partially satisfied requirements to continue collection against collection tasks that remain outstanding and what remains to be done.  Collection assets of new tasks designed to exploit cueing and other opportunities. 4-21. By monitoring operations, correlating reports to requirements, screening reports, and providing feedback, the staff ensures the most effective employment of collection assets. Information Collection Tasking and Directing 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 4-7 UPDATE THE INFORMATION COLLECTION PLAN 4-22. Evaluation of reporting, production, and dissemination identifies updates for the information collection plan. As the current tactical situation changes, staffs adjust the overall information collection plan to synchronize collection tasks. This optimizes collection and exploitation capabilities. The staff constantly updates requirements to ensure that information gathering efforts synchronize with current operations and support future operations planning. As collected information answers requirements, the staff updates the information collection plan. 4-23. The steps in updating the information collection plan include—  Maintain information collection activities synchronized to operations.  Cue assets to other collection requirements.  Eliminate satisfied requirements.  Develop and add new requirements.  Retask assets.  Transition to the next operation. 4-24. Each step to update information collection taskings requires intelligence and operations staff to collaborate. Some steps predominately engage the intelligence staff and others engage the operations staff. Some steps require coordination with other staff sections, and others may engage the entire operations and intelligence working group. Maintain Information Collection Activities Synchronized to Operations 4-25. As execution of the commander’s plan progresses, the staff refines decision point timeline estimates used when the information is required. The staff stays alert to the need for recommending changes in the information collection plan because of these refinements. As the need for change arises, the intelligence staff coordinates with the appropriate staff sections to update products required to refine the information collection plan. This may be as simple as updating timelines or the staff may completely redo these products. Cue Assets to Other Collection Requirements 4-26. The intelligence and operations staffs track the status of collection assets, cueing and teaming assets together as appropriate to minimize the chance of casualties. For example, if a Soldier reports the absence of normal activity in a normally active market area, the staff could recommend redirecting an unmanned aircraft system or other surveillance means to monitor the area for a potential threat. Eliminate Satisfied Requirements 4-27. The staff identifies requirements that were satisfied during the evaluation of the information collection plan. The staff eliminates requirements no longer relevant, whether satisfied or unsatisfied. When a requirement is satisfied or no longer relevant, the intelligence staff eliminates it from the information collection plan and updates any other logs or records. Develop and Add New Requirements 4-28. As the operation progresses and the situation develops, commanders develop new requirements. Intelligence staff begins updating the requirements planning tools. The intelligence staff prioritizes new requirements against remaining requirements. The intelligence staff consolidates the new requirements with the existing requirements, reprioritizes the requirements, evaluates resources based upon the consolidated listing and priorities, and makes appropriate recommendations to the commander and operations officer. Chapter 4 4-8 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Retask Assets 4-29. The staff may issue orders to retask assets. This is normally in consultation with the intelligence officer and other staff sections. Retasking is assigning an information collection asset with a new task and purpose. It occurs—  Upon completion of the staff’s initial requirement.  On order, after the LTIOV and having not satisfied the original requirement. (Adjusting the LTIOV may be required.)  As planned to support a branch or sequel.  In response to a variance. TRANSITION TO THE NEXT OPERATION 4-30. A transition occurs when the commander decides to change focus from one type of military operation to another. Updating information collection tasking may result in a change of focus for several collection assets. As with any other unit, collection assets may require rest and refit—or lead time for employment— to transition from one mission or operation to another effectively. 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 5-1 Chapter 5 Information Collection Assets This chapter discusses information collection assets and capability. It then discusses those assets by level, phase, and echelon. Lastly, this chapter discusses the network- enabled information collection. INFORMATION COLLECTION CAPABILITY 5-1. An information collection capability is any human or automated sensor, asset, or processing, exploitation, and dissemination system directed to collect information that enables better decisionmaking, expands understanding of the operational environment, and supports warfighting functions in decisive action. Factors including a unit’s primary mission, typical size area of operations (AO), number of personnel, and communications and network limitations significantly affect what sensors, platforms, and systems are fielded. 5-2. When a unit requires more robust collection assets to meet its mission, it may request resources and products from higher echelons and adjacent units. During prolonged conflict or joint and multinational operations, the conduct of routine or protracted reconnaissance, security, surveillance, and intelligence operations also impact joint intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) resource allocation and formalized information collection tasking and requesting procedures. INFORMATION COLLECTION PLAN BY LEVEL 5-3. Staffs ensure the collection activities remain focused on the commander’s critical information requirements (CCIRs). Staffs continuously update products and incorporate those products into the running estimates and common operational picture (COP). Lastly, staffs quickly identify and report threats and decisive points in the AO. 5-4. Paragraphs 5-5 through 5-8 illustrate collection activities at different levels during different activities of an operation. Strategic, operational, and tactical levels have different tasks to perform during the activities of an operation, but all levels work together to provide commanders the intelligence needed to complete each phase of an operation. Table 5-1 (page 5-2) provides some examples of information collection assets. STRATEGIC 5-5. National and theater-level collection assets provide tactical forces updates before and during deployment. Theater-level shaping operations require actionable intelligence including adversary centers of gravity and decision points as well as the prediction of adversary anti-access measures. Space-based resources are important to support situational awareness during deployment and entry phases because they—  Monitor protection indicators.  Provide warning of ballistic missile launches threatening aerial and seaports of debarkation and other threats to arriving forces.  Provide the communications links to forces en route.  Provide meteorological information that could affect operations. Chapter 5 5-2 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Table 5-1. Sample information collection assets Levels Examples of information collection assets Strategic • Defense Human Intelligence Service agents. • Central Intelligence Agency. • Federal Bureau of Investigation. • Defense Intelligence Agency. • National Security Agency. Operational • Regionally focused joint information centers. • Army’s military intelligence brigades. • Army aerial exploitation battalions. • Joint aerial assets. Tactical • A battlefield surveillance brigade. • Target acquisition radars. • Reconnaissance and cavalry squadrons and troops. • Attack reconnaissance aviation units. • Unmanned aircraft system. • Any Soldier with information to report. OPERATIONAL 5-6. The intelligence staff requests collection support with theater, joint, and national assets. Respective collection managers employ organic means to cover the seams and gaps between units. These organic means provide the deploying tactical force with the most complete portrayal possible of the enemy and potential adversaries, the populace, and the environmental situation upon entry. The operational-level intelligence assets operate from a regional focus center. This regional focus center (located in the crisis area) assumes primary analytical overwatch for the alerted tactical maneuver elements. The theater army’s military intelligence brigade provides overwatch and functions as both a command post and a research node. The military intelligence brigade intelligence staff must completely understand the deploying tactical force commanders’ intent. The military intelligence brigade must understand the deploying forces’ situation and current mission statuses. In addition, the military intelligence brigade requires access to all relevant data and knowledge about what is planned at higher headquarters and national levels. TACTICAL 5-7. The entire information collection and analysis effort shifts to provide tailored support to deploying forces in response to their CCIRs. Priority in the brigade combat team (BCT) shifts to planning to deploy and conduct offensive operations to secure a lodgment in the objective areas. The BCT prepares to conduct combat operations upon arrival. The BCT commander understands the situation sufficiently to employ the combat power of the BCT effectively. The BCT’s intelligence element collaborates with higher echelons to satisfy CCIRs and provide the context and focus to the information gathered. 5-8. As the unit prepares to fight upon arrival, it synchronizes its information collection activities with division and higher echelon headquarters. Operational-, theater-, and national-level intelligence collection reports are used to develop and continually update the COP. INFORMATION COLLECTION ASSETS BY PHASE 5-9. Paragraphs 5-10 through 5-17 illustrate collection activities at different phases of an operation. Units perform different tasks during deployment, entry, and transition. Commanders require certain information assets to complete each phase of an operation successfully. Information Collection Assets 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 5-3 DEPLOYMENT 5-10. Before issuing the execution order, higher tactical echelons and joint, interagency, intergovernmental, and multinational information collection assets support situation development and shaping operations in the objective area. Upon receipt of the execution order and approval of the course of action (COA), the geographic combatant command expands the size and scope of information collection activities. The geographic combatant command is in the area of responsibility with significant collection assets to detect, identify, and track adversary decision points and centers of gravity. The geographic combatant command collects information immediately available to the tactical echelon through the network. This continuously updates the COP and intelligence running estimate. Combat assessments of lethal and nonlethal effects drive decisions regarding the deployment timing, locations, and actions on arrival. ENTRY 5-11. During the entry phase, deploying units are particularly vulnerable to enemy actions. Effective intelligence reduces that vulnerability. Tactical forces use the information that their higher headquarters, and theater- and national-level assets provide to maintain situational awareness and refine plans. The intelligence running estimate provides the commander predictive intelligence to anticipate adversary actions. Updates en route provide continuing information about the situation, the threat, and the environment. Updates allow the commander to adjust the plan before arrival to respond to changes in the AO or threat actions. 5-12. Forces conduct tactical assault upon arrival as necessary. They conduct continuous reconnaissance, intelligence, and security operations. As the buildup of forces continues, the tactical forces reduce dependence on higher echelon resources and rely more on organic assets. As organic and supporting assets arrive into the theater, commanders immediately employ these assets to support tactical-level situational awareness. In addition, operational and strategic resources still contribute to the COP. Arriving units and staffs establish liaisons with units already in the AO. 5-13. As the BCT enters the AO, it relies primarily on national-, theater-, and higher-tactical echelon information collectors until its organic assets become fully available. The intelligence overwatch support section provides context and focus to information gathered by theater and national collectors. Appropriate to echelon, the S-2 and military intelligence elements focus and put the information collected, analyzed, and disseminated by higher echelons into context. The different echelons integrate raw and analyzed information to answer their commander’s priority intelligence requirements (PIRs) and tailor reports to mission requirements. In the early phases of entry operations, focused, detailed collection and analysis of the BCT’s operational environment remains a primary responsibility of its higher headquarters. The BCT provides its own situational awareness of the operational environment when assigned its operational area. 5-14. Once on the ground, the BCT immediately begins to deploy its information collection reconnaissance units, sensors, and collection systems. The tactical echelon expands its sensing and collecting capabilities until the entire force is on the ground and achieves maximum situational awareness. During entry operations, echelons above brigade provide collection support and serve to complement the BCT’s organic reconnaissance units and assets. Once the BCT deploys, strategic and operational echelons continue to complement the BCT’s organic assets and focus on those areas outside the sensing range and capability of the maneuver elements. Sensors covering the noncontiguous AO provide early warning and cueing of the BCT’s reconnaissance squadron and sensors. TRANSITION 5-15. Information collection requirements during the transition phase shift from one operation to another. The combatant commander remains aware that major combat operations and stability operations may occur simultaneously. 5-16. Commanders may reprioritize strategic and operational echelon information collection assets. The BCT’s collection assets become a resource for division headquarters and higher echelon units for their information needs. The AO generally involves other nations. Often, multinational information collection focus increases along with the involvement of nongovernmental organizations. Multinational collection Chapter 5 5-4 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 entities may operate in each brigade’s AO with no formal command relationship. Commanders must effectively integrate these capabilities into collection plans and processes to prevent unnecessary redundancy and maximize information sharing. 5-17. During this phase, the combatant commander and all subordinate echelons redefine adversary centers of gravity and focus information collection activities on political, social, economic, information, and criminal activities that pose a threat to friendly forces and the stability of the AO. Collaboration and interaction with all friendly elements in the AO is essential. Predictive assessments for the remaining threat forces or illicit factions contribute to future operational planning and force disposition. INFORMATION COLLECTION ASSETS BY ECHELON 5-18. Paragraphs 5-19 through 5-41 illustrate collection activities in different echelons of an operation. Different units perform different tasks at each echelon. Commanders at different echelons require certain information assets to complete each phase of an operation successfully. SPECIAL OPERATIONS FORCES 5-19. Special operations forces may possess a high degree of cultural awareness due to their extensive training, experience, and regional orientation. Some members of every unit communicate in the local language. Civil affairs units are also sources of useful information; however, commanders recognize that the legitimacy of civil affairs operations often hinges on whether the local population perceives those forces are collecting information. Civil affairs may be tasked to collect information en route to or returning from a meeting with host-nation personnel but may not be tasked to collect information during the meeting. Some special operations forces make ideal collection assets during stability operations because they can interact with the local population. 5-20. Historically, special operations forces have operated independently from conventional forces, although both plan and execute operations in a synchronized framework to support the joint force commander’s overall plan. Recent operations have produced situations where conventional forces and special operations forces operate in the same operational area simultaneously and require close coordination. Conventional forces and special operations forces can complement one another in a number of areas, including information collection activities.Special operations forces can provide conventional forces with special reconnaissance capabilities, positive identification of targets, target marking and terminal guidance, battle damage assessment, information on indigenous forces, and combat weather support. Conventional forces can provide special operations forces with robust fire support, multiple attack resource options, lethal and nonlethal effects, and other resources available to heavier forces. 5-21. Key lessons for successfully integrating conventional forces with special operations forces include:  Establish personal relationships (rapport).  Train integrated forces before conducting tactical operations.  Clearly define and articulate command relationships.  Fully integrate planning and intelligence efforts to alleviate misunderstandings.  Understand the strengths and limitations of each force and use this knowledge as an advantage. MILITARY INTELLIGENCE BRIGADE 5-22. The theater army’s military intelligence brigade provides intelligence support, including support for information collection activities. The military intelligence brigade supports the theater army, other Army operational-level commands in the area of responsibility, and combatant, joint, or multinational commands. 5-23. The military intelligence brigade consists of the—  Operations battalion.  Forward collection battalion (counterintelligence and human intelligence).  Forward collection battalion (signals intelligence).  Strategic signals intelligence battalion.  Theater support battalion. Information Collection Assets 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 5-5 5-24. The military intelligence brigade performs intelligence operations, all-source intelligence analysis, intelligence production, intelligence collection management, and intelligence dissemination support of the theater army. It provides dedicated long-term, continuous support to the geographic combatant commander or subunified commander for that commander’s theater security cooperation plan and small-scale contingencies. It also provides in-theater intelligence support during major combat operations. 5-25. The military intelligence brigade provides the theater army commander with dedicated intelligence capabilities for all intelligence disciplines. It has robust counterintelligence and human intelligence capabilities with interrogation and exploitation potential. Each military intelligence brigade has dedicated imagery intelligence analysts and most have imagery intelligence collection capabilities. The military intelligence brigade also has measurement and signature intelligence capabilities. BATTLEFIELD SURVEILLANCE BRIGADE 5-26. The battlefield surveillance brigade (BFSB) conducts reconnaissance and security to collect information to defense support of civil authorities at echelons above brigade level. It helps develop the COP and it enhances commanders’ decisionmaking. Table 5-2 (page 5-6) identifies BFSB collection assets. The BFSB fills two roles in division-level and higher operations. It augments BCTs and supporting brigades to enhance their abilities to accomplish missions. It also executes their portion of the information collection plan—  In that portion of the AO not assigned to a subordinate unit.  In an AO assigned to it by the supported unit.  In an area that has characteristics of both types (assigned AO). 5-27. Assets above division level can fulfill many intelligence requirements but may not answer all of them. Often, higher-level operational needs take precedence and cause assets at these levels to focus on the next higher echelon’s CCIRs. In some cases, higher-level assets may not provide the level of detail or timeliness the BFSB’s supported command requires. The BFSB bridges the gap between the tactical reconnaissance and security executed at brigade level and the operational and strategic reconnaissance executed at levels above the division. 5-28. In its other role, the BFSB augments other brigades by providing counterintelligence, human intelligence, signals intelligence, and unmanned aircraft system. In some situations, augmentation includes elements of the reconnaissance squadron. The BFSB provides a means for the supported commander to weigh the decisive operation or the main effort and to provide other brigades with assets, capabilities, or the increased capacity required for a mission or operation. (See FM 3-55.1 for additional information on BFSB operations.) COMBAT AVIATION BRIGADE 5-29. The combat aviation brigade accomplishes reconnaissance and surveillance with its attack reconnaissance battalions and (when fielded) one unmanned aircraft system company. The heavy, medium, light, and expeditionary combat aviation brigade have similar organization, varying only in the type and number of attack reconnaissance battalions. Heavy and medium combat aviation brigades have more robust firepower capabilities than light and expeditionary combat aviation brigades. 5-30. The combat aviation brigade commander is the higher commander’s senior advisor for employment of aviation assets. The combat aviation brigade commander and staff are the primary integrators of manned aircraft and unmanned aircraft system operations. 5-31. The unmanned aircraft system company of the combat aviation brigade, when fully fielded, deploys a one system ground control station to the BFSB and fires brigade as required for mission planning and execution. Based on higher echelon requirements, the BFSB and fires brigade control the unmanned aircraft for reconnaissance and surveillance operations. The combat aviation brigade launches the aircraft and turns control over to the one system ground control station operators. The one system ground control station locates where it can best control the aircraft and disseminates collected information. Chapter 5 5-6 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Table 5-2. Battlefield surveillance brigade information collection assets Warfighting Function Organization Capability Movement and Maneuver Reconnaissance squadron Conduct area, zone, or route reconnaissance. Intelligence Military intelligence battalion intelligence operations Provide signals intercept and signal emitter location data that use 12-person multifunction teams that combine signals intelligence, human intelligence, and counterintelligence capabilities and supporting operational management teams. Provide counterintelligence and human intelligence teams and supporting operational management teams that provide general support to division or corps collection requirements. Provide counterintelligence and human intelligence teams that provide general support to augment capabilities of a maneuver brigade. Provide counterintelligence or human intelligence capability to a functional brigade. Provide aerial reconnaissance and surveillance capability. Provide battle damage assessment capability. Intelligence Headquarters and headquarters company Support development of brigade common operational picture, targeting, intelligence preparation of the battlefield, and analysis of reporting across all the warfighting functions and development of intelligence products. Provide geospatial intelligence. Receive, process, and display near-real time information from nonorganic airborne sensors, including joint surveillance target attack radar system. Provide additional information collected during conduct of primary missions. Sustainment Brigade support company Provide information and intelligence developed and disseminated through mission command systems (such as command post of the future). Mission Command Brigade headquarters and headquarters company Provide additional information collected during conduct of primary missions. Provide signal retransmission teams that provide additional observation posts. FIRES BRIGADE 5-32. Normally fires brigades are assigned, attached, or placed under the operational control of a division headquarters. However, these brigades may be attached or placed under operational control to a corps headquarters, a joint forces land component command, a joint task force (JTF), or another Service or functional component. Fire brigades are task organized to accomplish missions. 5-33. Fires brigades reconnoiter, detect, and attack targets and confirm the effectiveness of fires. Fire brigades have robust communications and control systems that facilitate the efficient application of fires. They have the necessary fire support and targeting structure to effectively execute the entire decide, detect, deliver, and assess targeting process for their assigned tasks. 5-34. The fires brigade and each of its subordinate organizations can be augmented (task-organized) as required. For instance, executing a strike may require placing additional collection assets capabilities under operational control of the fires brigade headquarters. Alternatively, the BFSB can retain control of its organic assets and provide the information and desired effects to the fires brigade. Information Collection Assets 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 5-7 BRIGADE COMBAT TEAM 5-35. The BCT is the Army’s largest defined combined arms organization and the Army’s primary close combat force. For combat operations, the combatant commander builds the ground component of a JTF around the BCT. The BCT includes units and capabilities from every warfighting function; it is task- organized to meet mission requirements. Some capabilities, such as unmanned aircraft system platoons, are assets with a sole purpose to support information collection activities. However, commanders consider some information collection assets not immediately obvious when planning reconnaissance and surveillance tasks and missions to answer CCIRs fully. See tables 5-3 (page 5-8), 5-4 (page 5-9), and 5-5 (page 5-10) for each BCT’s information collection assets. 5-36. The BCT conducts reconnaissance, security, and intelligence operations. The BCT commander gains situational understanding by conducting integrated reconnaissance and security operations that answer the CCIRs. The BCT assigns short-term reconnaissance, intelligence, and security tasks to its reconnaissance squadron; sustained missions usually require participation from the entire BCT. When the BCT assigns reconnaissance or security tasks to a subordinate element, the BCT task-organizes the subordinate element and allocates the resources necessary to meet its mission requirements. The BCT may allocate tank and mechanized infantry units, reconnaissance units, engineer elements, attack helicopter units, close air support priority, and intelligence systems to perform reconnaissance or security tasks. (See FM 3-90.6 for information on reconnaissance, security, and intelligence operations for the BCT.) 5-37. The BCT operations section—  Develops the information collection plan.  Tasks subordinate units.  Ensures the information collection plan supports the overall scheme of maneuver. 5-38. The BCT intelligence section—  Assesses information received to derive intelligence.  Performs requirements planning and assessment of information collection. Chapter 5 5-8 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Table 5-3. Infantry brigade combat team information collection assets Warfighting Function Organization Capability Movement and Maneuver Reconnaissance squadron Conduct Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy requirements. Conduct security operations and surveillance tasks as required. Conduct area, zone, or route reconnaissance. Infantry battalion Conduct Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy requirements, including tactical questioning. Provide scout platoon capability for real-time detection, recognition, and identification of distant target locations. Intelligence Military intelligence company Conduct intelligence operations, military source operations, document exploitation, interrogation and debriefing, and counterintelligence operations (such as preliminary investigations). Support development of brigade common operational picture, targeting, intelligence preparation of the battlefield, analysis, reconnaissance and surveillance reporting across all the warfighting functions, and intelligence products. Provide organic aerial reconnaissance and surveillance and battle damage assessment capability. Fires Fires battalion Conduct Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy information requirements. Detect artillery and mortar fires and establish long-duration observation posts. Sustainment Brigade support battalion Provide additional information collected during conduct of primary missions. Provide information on types of wounds or injuries, diseases, and health and welfare of population that refines understanding of operational environment or enemy capabilities. Protection Brigade special troops battalion Provide information collected during internment and resettlement, area security, and maneuver mobility defense support of civil authorities. Engineer company Conduct Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy information requirements. Provide terrain teams and reconnaissance teams that identify key terrain, obstacle intelligence, and infrastructure information. Mission Command Brigade special troops battalion Provide information and intelligence developed and disseminated through mission command systems. Conduct route, area, and zone CBRN reconnaissance to detect, identify, mark, report, and sample for presence of CBRN hazards. CBRN chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear Information Collection Assets 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 5-9 Table 5-4. Armored brigade combat team information collection assets Warfighting function Organization Capability Movement and Maneuver Reconnaissance squadron Conduct security operations and surveillance tasks including Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy information requirements. Conduct area, zone, or route reconnaissance. Combined arms battalion Conduct Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy information requirements, including tactical questioning. Provide scout platoon capability for real-time detection, recognition, and identification of distant target locations. Intelligence Military intelligence company Conduct intelligence operations, source operations, document exploitation, interrogation and debriefing, and counterintelligence operations (such as preliminary investigations). Provide organic aerial reconnaissance and surveillance and battle damage assessment capability. Receive, process, and display near real-time information from non-organic airborne sensors. Fires Fires battalion Conduct Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy information requirements. Detect artillery and mortar fires. Establish long-duration observation posts. Sustainment Brigade support battalion Provide additional information collected during conduct of primary missions. Provide information on types of wounds or injuries, diseases, and health and welfare of population that refines understanding of operational environment or enemy capabilities. Provide additional information collected during conduct of primary missions. Protection Brigade special troops battalion Provide information collected during internment and resettlement, area security, and maneuver mobility support operations. Conduct Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy information requirements. Provide terrain teams and reconnaissance teams to identify key terrain, obstacle intelligence, and infrastructure information. Conduct route, area, and zone CBRN reconnaissance to detect, identify, mark, report, and sample for presence of CBRN hazards. Mission Command Brigade special troops battalion Provide additional information collected during conduct of primary missions. Provide signal retransmission teams that can provide additional observation post capability. CBRN chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear Chapter 5 5-10 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Table 5-5. Stryker brigade combat team information collection assets Warfighting function Organization Capability Movement and Maneuver Reconnaissance squadron Conduct security operations, surveillance tasks, and tactical questioning to include Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy information requirements. Conduct area, zone, or route reconnaissance. Provide organic unmanned aircraft system platoon to conduct aerial reconnaissance and surveillance and battle damage assessment. Provide prophet signal intercept system to provide signals intercept and signal emitter location data. Provide CBRN platoon to conduct route, area, and zone CBRN reconnaissance to detect, identify, mark, report, and sample for presence of CBRN hazards. Provide unattended ground sensors platoon for increased unmanned monitoring of terrain. Stryker battalions Conduct Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy information requirements including tactical questioning. Intelligence Military intelligence company Conduct intelligence operations military source operations. Document exploitation, interrogation and debriefing, and counterintelligence operations (such as preliminary investigations). Support development of brigade common operational picture, targeting, intelligence preparation of the battlefield, analysis of reporting across all the warfighting functions, and development of intelligence products. Receive, process, and display near real time information from non- organic airborne sensors. Fires Fires battalion Conduct Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy information collection requirements. Detect artillery and mortar fires. Establish long duration observation posts. Sustainment Brigade support battalion Provide additional information collected during conduct of primary missions. Provide information on types of wounds or injuries, diseases, and health and welfare of population that refines understanding of operational environment or enemy capabilities. Protection Military police platoon Provide information collected during internment and resettlement, area security, and maneuver mobility support operations Conduct route, area, and zone CBRN reconnaissance to detect, identify, mark, report, and sample for presence of CBRN hazards. Engineer company Conduct Soldier sensor missions, as needed, to satisfy information requirements. Provide terrain teams and reconnaissance teams to identify key terrain, obstacle Intelligence, and infrastructure information. Mission Command Brigade support battalion Provide combat information and intelligence developed and disseminated through mission command systems (such as command post of the future). Provide additional information collected during conduct of primary missions. Provide signal retransmission teams that can provide additional observation post capabilities. CBRN chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear Information Collection Assets 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 5-11 BRIGADE COMBAT TEAM RECONNAISSANCE SQUADRON 5-39.The reconnaissance squadrons of the armored BCT, infantry BCT, and Stryker BCT are organized to accomplish reconnaissance and security missions throughout the BCT’s AO. By leveraging information technology with air and ground reconnaissance capabilities in complex terrain, the reconnaissance squadron focuses on all categories of threats in a designated AO. The BCT commander maintains battlefield mobility and agility while choosing the time, place, and method to confront the enemy. The squadron commander has various tools to conduct reconnaissance and security missions across the range of military operations. The squadron commander can task-organize to optimize complementary effects while maximizing support throughout the BCT’s AO. (See FM 3-20.96 for information on the BCT reconnaissance squadrons.) 5-40. Army information collection assets at the brigade level ensure intelligence and information is available to commanders in increasingly decentralized AOs. Corps, division, and BCTs often require information from the same assets. The requirement for layering information collection capabilities—some with theater-level applications—and the logistics, processing, exploitation, and dissemination of those assets require management at echelons above brigade. 5-41. Information collection capabilities rapidly evolve to meet new challenges of the current and future AOs and provide the flexibility required to provide information across the range of military operations. To act decisively, commanders and staffs identify, understand, and integrate (sometimes creatively) the multitude of information collection capabilities found at every echelon across the warfighting functions. NETWORK-ENABLED INFORMATION COLLECTION 5-42. Joint elements network to create information sharing and collaboration. This networking provides a greater unity of effort, synchronization, and integration of all elements at the lowest echelons. Distributed Common Ground System (Army) (DCGS-A) provides a network-centric, enterprise intelligence, weather, geospatial engineering, and space operations capabilities to maneuver, maneuver support, and sustainment organizations at all echelons from battalion to JTFs. The DCGS-A integrates intelligence tasking, collection, processing, and dissemination across the Army and joint community. DCGS-A unites the different systems across the global information network. DCGS-A is the Army’s primary system for—  Receipt of and processing select information collection asset data.  Control of select Army sensor systems.  Fusion of sensor data and information.  Direction and distribution of relevant threat, terrain, weather, and civil considerations products and information.  Facilitation of friendly information and reporting. This page intentionally left blank. 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 6-1 Chapter 6 Joint Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance The Army conducts operations as part of a joint force. This chapter examines joint intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance activities as part of unified action. It discusses the joint intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance concepts, doctrine, resources, and planning systems. It then discusses national intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance resources and guidelines. Lastly, this chapter discusses joint intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance considerations and organization. JOINT ISR AND UNIFIED ACTION 6-1. Unified action is the synchronization, coordination, and/or integration of the activities of governmental and nongovernmental entities with military operations to achieve unity of effort (JP 1). It involves the application of all instruments of national power, including actions of other government agencies and multinational military and nonmilitary organizations. Combatant and subordinate commanders use unified action to integrate and synchronize their operations directly with the activities and operations of other military forces and nonmilitary organizations in their area of operations. 6-2. Army forces in an operational area are exposed to many non-Army participants. Multinational formations, host-nation forces, other governmental agencies, contractors, and nongovernmental organizations are located in the operational area. Each participant has distinct characteristics, vocabulary, and culture, and all can contribute to situational understanding. Commanders, Soldiers, and all who seek to gather information gain by working with and leveraging the capabilities of these entities. The Army expands the joint intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) doctrine (see JP 2-01) by defining information collection as an activity that focuses on answering the commander’s critical information requirements (CCIRs). JOINT ISR CONCEPTS 6-3. Joint ISR is an intelligence function. The J-2 controls joint ISR’s collections systems, which are intelligence assets and resources. This is different from Army information collection. Joint ISR does not include reconnaissance and surveillance units. Joint usage of reconnaissance and surveillance refers to the missions conducted by airborne assets. Integration and interdependence are two key concepts that influence how the Army conducts joint ISR in the joint operations area. INTEGRATION 6-4. The Army uses integration to extend the principle of combined arms to operations conducted by two or more Service components. The combination of diverse joint force capabilities creates combat power more potent than the sum of its parts. This integration does not require joint command at all echelons; however, it does require joint interoperability at all echelons. Chapter 6 6-2 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 INTERDEPENDENCE 6-5. The Army uses interdependence to govern joint operations and impact joint ISR activities. This interdependence is the purposeful reliance by one Service’s forces on another Service’s capabilities to maximize the complementary and reinforcing effects of both. Army forces operate as part of an interdependent joint force. Areas of interdependence that directly enhance Army information collection activities include:  Joint command and control. This includes integrated capabilities that—  Gain information superiority through improved, fully synchronized and integrated ISR, knowledge management, and information management.  Share a common operational picture (COP).  Improve the ability of joint force and Service component commanders to conduct operations.  Joint intelligence. This includes integrated processes that—  Reduce unnecessary redundancies in collection asset tasking through integrated ISR.  Increase processing and analytic capability.  Facilitate collaborative analysis.  Provide global intelligence production and dissemination.  Provide intelligence products that enhance situational understanding by describing and assessing an operational environment. JOINT ISR DOCTRINE 6-6. JP 2-01 governs joint ISR doctrine. The joint force headquarters in the theater of operations govern operational policies and procedures specific to that theater. Army personnel serving in joint commands must know joint doctrine for ISR. Army personnel involved in joint operations must understand the joint operation planning process. The joint operation planning process focuses on the interaction between an organization’s commander and staff and the commanders and staffs of the next higher and lower commands. The joint operation planning process continues throughout an operation. 6-7. Army and joint doctrine share many of the same terms and definitions; however, commanders and staffs must understand their use and differences. Examples include joint use of ISR and the Army’s use of information collection, joint operations area instead of area of operations (AO), and the joint operation planning process instead of the military decisionmaking process (MDMP). JOINT ISR RESOURCES 6-8. When organic collection assets or other Army resources are not sufficient, the intelligence officer and operations officer need to understand how to access joint resources. The exact procedures vary in each operational theater. The joint force collection manager reviews all requests for joint ISR resources based on validated needs established by the command’s formal intelligence requirements. 6-9. A request for information is one type of resource. Subordinate Army commanders submit their requests for information through echelon channels. If the intermediate echelons cannot answer the requests, they are passed to the joint task force’s (JTF) request for information section for research and response. Once a request for information is returned without an answer, subordinate commanders can submit a request for joint ISR support to the joint intelligence operations center. The joint intelligence operations center apportions its assets or other resources from higher echelons against the requests it receives, in order of priority, as defined by the JTF commander. Requests that cannot be satisfied by assets controlled or apportioned by the JTF are translated into the national intelligence system for collection. 6-10. Another resource is air support. At echelons below Army Service component command, requests for joint ISR air support go through an air support operations center or similar organization. Units requesting joint ISR support must accurately write air support requests and request the desired capability or effect, not the airframe. Air Force air liaison officers at that headquarters may help train Army personnel how to prepare air support requests; however, their primary duty is to advise the commander and staff. Joint Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 6-3 6-11. Some resources are outside the theater. The mission may require joint ISR resources not organic to the theater or to the components of the subordinate joint force. Joint ISR resources are typically in high demand and requirements usually exceed platform capabilities or inventory. The joint force collection manager must ensure that all requests for additional joint ISR resources are based on validated needs as established by the command’s formal intelligence requirements. JOINT ISR PLANNING SYSTEMS 6-12. Two joint ISR planning systems—the collection management mission application and the Planning Tool for Resource, Integration, Synchronization, and Management (PRISM)—help facilitate access to joint resources. PRISM, a subsystem of collection management mission application, is a Web-based management and synchronization tool used to maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of theater operations. PRISM creates a collaborative environment for resource managers, collection managers, exploitation managers, and customers. In joint collection management operations, the collection manager coordinates with the operations directorate to forward collection requirements to the component commander exercising tactical control over the theater reconnaissance and surveillance assets. A mission tasking order goes to the unit responsible for the collection operations. At the selected unit, the mission manager makes the final choice of platforms, equipment, and personnel required for the collection operations based on operational considerations such as maintenance, schedules, training, and experience. The Air Force uses the collection management mission application. This application is a Web-centric information systems architecture that incorporates existing programs sponsored by several commands, Services, and agencies. It also provides tools for recording, gathering, organizing, and tracking intelligence collection requirements for all disciplines. JOINT AIR PLANNING PROCESS 6-13. Any joint ISR plan involving airborne assets or resources must consider the joint air planning process. The combatant commander has an air component with an air and space operations center. This air and space operations center controls the airspace in the area of responsibility and all air activity above the coordinating altitude determined by that commander. The air and space operations center must know everything flying above the coordinating altitude. The air and space operations center prioritizes joint ISR requirements for the assets that the Air Force component command controls and apportions. In a multinational headquarters, the air and space operations center is the combined air and space operations center. 6-14. Recent operations have demonstrated the value of having joint ISR liaison officers at Army organizational headquarters to help tactical commanders integrate theater ISR assets into their operations. These officers come from the air and space operations center, combined air and space operations center, or the Combined Forces Air Component Command. These liaison elements provide joint expertise and direct liaison with the combined air and space operations center. These liaison elements also provide insight to the combined air and space operations center and related organizations into the operations they support. JOINT ISR CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS 6-15. The counterpart to the joint ISR plan is the joint ISR concept of operations. The concept of operations is developed with operational planning. The joint ISR concept of operations is based on the collection strategy and ISR execution planning. It is developed jointly by the joint force J-2 and J-3. The joint ISR concept of operations addresses how all available ISR assets and associated tasking, processing, exploitation, and dissemination infrastructure, including multinational or coalition and commercial assets, are used to answer the joint force’s intelligence requirements. It identifies asset shortfalls relative to the joint force’s validated priority intelligence requirements (PIRs). It requires periodic evaluation of the capabilities and contributions of all available ISR assets to maximize efficient utilization and ensure the timely release of allocated ISR resources when no longer needed by the joint force. (See chapter 2 of JP 2-01 for more information on the concept of operations in detail.) Chapter 6 6-4 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 NATIONAL ISR RESOURCES AND GUIDELINES 6-16. In the context of the National Intelligence Priority Framework, ISR operations justifies requests for additional national ISR resources. National collection resources are leveraged against national priorities. Intelligence officers must remember that these assets are scarce and have a multitude of high-priority requirements. NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE SUPPORT TEAMS 6-17. National intelligence support teams (NISTs) are formed at the request of a deployed joint or combined task force commander. NISTs are comprised of intelligence and communications experts from Defense Intelligence Agency, Central Intelligence Agency, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, National Security Agency, and other agencies as required to support the needs of the joint force commander. Defense Intelligence Agency is the executive agent for all NIST operations. Once on station, the NIST supplies a steady stream of agency intelligence on local conditions and potential threats. The needs of the mission dictate size and composition of NISTs. 6-18. Depending on the situation, NIST personnel are often sent to support corps- or division-level organizations. However, during recent operations in Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom, national agencies placed personnel at the brigade combat team (BCT) level in some cases. PLANNING AND REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION SYSTEMS 6-19. Several national databases and Intelink Web sites contain information applicable to the intelligence preparation of the battlefield (IPB) process and national ISR planning. Commanders and their staff should review and evaluate those sites to determine the availability of current data, information, and intelligence products that answer intelligence or information requirements.  Modernized integrated database contains current, worldwide order-of-battle data organized by country, unit, facility, and equipment.  National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency’s National Exploitation System permits users to research the availability of imagery coverage over targets of interest and to access historical national imagery archives and imagery intelligence reports.  Country knowledge bases and crisis home pages are maintained by many combatant command and joint force commands as Intelink Web sites containing the best and most up-to-date intelligence products available from the intelligence community.  Signals intelligence online information system is a database that contains current and historical finished signals intelligence products.  Secure analyst file environment is a set of structured data files that provide access to the following databases:  Intelligence Report Index Summary File contains index records and the full text of current and historical intelligence information reports.  All-Source Document Index contains index records and abstracts for hardcopy all-source intelligence documents produced by Defense Intelligence Agency.  Human intelligence collection requirements is a registry of all validated human intelligence requirements and tasking.  Modernized Defense Intelligence Threat Data System is a collection of analytic tools that support the retrieval and analysis of information and intelligence related to counterintelligence, indications and warning, and counterterrorism.  Community online intelligence system for end users and managers is a database application that allows the user to identify and track the status of all validated crisis and noncrisis intelligence production requirements. Joint Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 6-5 REQUIREMENTS MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 6-20. The requirements management system provides the national and Department of Defense imagery communities with a uniform automated collection management system. The requirements management system manages intelligence requirements for the national and Department of Defense user community to support the United States’ imagery and geospatial information system. The National Geospatial- Intelligence Agency manages this system and provides end-to-end management of national and strategic imagery collection, exploitation, and dissemination. This system enables creation, review, and approval of imagery requests. It tasks requirements for collection, production, and exploitation of imagery to appropriate locations. The requirements management system determines satisfaction of imagery requests, modifies imagery requests based on input from other sources of intelligence, and provides analytical tools for users to exploit. 6-21. The developed messages of the requirements management system are dispatched for approval and subsequent collection and exploitation tasking.The system is central to current and future integrated imagery and geospatial information management architectures supporting national, military, and civil customers. 6-22. Nominations management services provide the coordination necessary to accept user requirements for new information. These services aggregate, assign, and prioritize these user requirements. Nominations management services also track requirement satisfaction from the users. NATIONAL SIGNALS INTELLIGENCE REQUIREMENTS PROCESS 6-23. The national signals intelligence requirements process (NSRP) is an integrated and responsive system of the policies, procedures, and technology used by the intelligence community to manage requests for national-level signals intelligence products and services. The NSRP replaced the previous system called the national signals intelligence requirement system. 6-24. The NSRP establishes an end-to-end cryptologic mission management tracking system using information needs. Collectors of signals intelligence satisfy tactical through national consumer information needs based on NSRP guidance. The NSRP improves the consumer’s ability to communicate with the collector by adding focus and creating a mechanism for accountability and feedback. 6-25. Information needs are used in NSRP to relay the collection requirements to signals intelligence collectors and systems. Users prioritize and classify information needs according to standardized time categories. Priorities for research information needs involve limited efforts and only exist for a set time using existing data (no new collection is required). Limited duration information needs require collection and production over a period of up to 90 days. Standing information needs require sustained collection over periods exceeding 90 days and up to 2 years. 6-26. Information needs are further prioritized based on how quickly the signals intelligence community must react to the request for collection by identifying—  Routine information needs that require action in 30 or more days.  Time sensitive information needs that require actions in 4 to 29 days after submission.  Time critical information needs that require actions in the first three days after submission. 6-27. Requests for national signals intelligence collection must be sponsored at the national level, validated by the intelligence community, and prioritized among all the other competing requirements. GUIDELINES FOR ACCESSING NATIONAL RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION 6-28. Depending upon local procedures and systems available, the Army intelligence officer may use various means to submit a request for information. The bulleted guidelines in this paragraph help access national-level resources to answer the request for information—  Know the PIRs and identify gaps that exist in the intelligence database and products.  Know what collection assets are available from supporting and supported forces.  Understand the timeline for preplanned and dynamic collection requests for particular assets. Chapter 6 6-6 FM 3-55 3 May 2013  Identify collection assets and dissemination systems that may help answer the commander’s PIRs.  Ensure liaison and coordination elements are aware of PIRs and timelines for satisfaction.  Ensure PIRs are tied to operational decisions.  During planning, identify collection requirements and any trained analyst augmentation required to support post-strike battle damage assessment or other analysis requirements.  Plan for cueing to exploit collection platforms. JOINT ISR CONSIDERATIONS 6-29. Communication and cooperation with other agencies and organizations in the joint operations area enhances ISR collection efforts and creates sources of information with insights not otherwise available. Commanders must understand the respective roles and capabilities of the civilian organizations in the joint operations area to coordinate most effectively. Civilian organizations have different organizational cultures and norms. Some organizations may work with the Army while others may not. Some organizations are sensitive about being perceived as involved in intelligence operations with the military. Some considerations in obtaining the valuable information these organizations may have access to are—  Relationship building. This takes time, effort, and a willingness to schedule time to meet with individuals.  Patience. It is best not to expect results quickly and to avoid the appearance of tasking other agencies to provide information.  Reciprocity. U.S. forces often help or support to facilitate cooperation.  Mutual interests. Other organizations may have the same interests as U.S. forces (such as increased security).  Mutual trust. At a minimum, organizations trust U.S. forces will not abuse the relationship and that the information is provided in good faith. 6-30. Commanders cannot task civilian organizations to collect information. However, U.S. government intelligence or law enforcement agencies collect or have access to information as part of their operations. These organizations may benefit by mutually sharing information and can be an excellent resource. Provincial reconstruction teams, for example, work in cooperation with military efforts and can provide information important to the commander’s lines of effort such as infrastructure, governance, economic development, and healthcare. JOINT ISR ORGANIZATION 6-31. The JTF is the primary organization for joint operations. If other nations are included, it is a combined JTF. The JTF performs missions of short duration with specific, limited objectives. The JTF draws units from theater components and may receive augmentation of units, intelligence capabilities, and communications from outside the theater. 6-32. When Army forces operate under a JTF or combined JTF for unified action, several organizations in the joint intelligence architecture help lower echelons with their joint ISR and information collection plans. The J-2 headquarters of a typical JTF has a joint intelligence operations center. In this center, the collection management and the request for information sections are useful to Army intelligence officers as they plan joint ISR operations. In some cases, the collection management and dissemination sections are combined by the J-2. (See chapter 2 of JP 3-33 for information on organization of JTF staff). 6-33. Key joint organizations for joint ISR include—  Joint intelligence support element.  Air and space operations center or combined air and space operations center.  Intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations.  Multinational operations. Joint Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 6-7 JOINT INTELLIGENCE SUPPORT ELEMENT 6-34. The joint intelligence support element may also augment the J-2 element of the JTF. The collection management operations branch section within the joint intelligence support element is the interface where subordinate Army commanders receive support from the JTF. The collection management operations branch oversees the JTF’s ISR activities. Dynamic retasking of joint resources must be coordinated with the joint intelligence support element collection management operations branch. AIR AND SPACE OPERATIONS CENTER OR COMBINED AIR AND SPACE OPERATIONS CENTER 6-35. Joint air planning products produced by the air and space operations center include the air tasking order, airspace control order, and special instructions. The air tasking order, airspace control order, and special instructions provide operational and tactical direction at the appropriate levels of detail. For aerial assets, these products are important for intelligence staffs as well as mission managers and operators (for example, unmanned aircraft system operators and aircraft pilots). 6-36. Army intelligence staffs coordinate with the air and space operations center through an Army unit called a battlefield coordination detachment. The battlefield coordination detachment is the Army Service component command’s liaison at the air and space operations center. This detachment communicates the land component commander’s issues to the air component commander. Aerial collection requests flow through the battlefield coordination detachment to the air and space operations center for consideration. (See ATTP 3-09.13 for more information on battlefield coordination detachment duties and responsibilities). 6-37. The air and space operations center sends a liaison element to the air component command element to communicate the air component commander’s issues to the land component commander. INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 6-38. In addition to working with U.S. government agencies, unified action involves synchronizing joint or multinational military operations with activities of other governmental agencies, intergovernmental organizations, nongovernmental organizations, and contractors. These organizations may have significant access, specialized knowledge, or insight and understanding of the local situation. These organizations vary widely in their purposes, interests, and ability or willingness to cooperate with the information-gathering activities of U.S. forces. It is important to develop a relationship to exchange information without revealing requirements. MULTINATIONAL OPERATIONS 6-39. Multinational operations is a collective term to describe military actions conducted by forces of two or more nations, usually undertaken within the structure of a coalition or alliance (JP 3-16). Intensive coordination, training, and extensive liaison are important to effective multinational ISR operations. 6-40. In multinational operations, the JTF must share intelligence to accomplish the mission with foreign military forces and coordinate the exchange of intelligence liaisons with those forces. Command and control of ISR resources may remain essentially national or be integrated into a combined command and control structure. There is no single intelligence doctrine for multinational operations. Each coalition or alliance develops its own procedures. (See JP 2-01 for more information on the intelligence considerations for multinational operations.) 6-41. Multinational force commanders establish a system that optimizes each nation’s contributions. Managing assets from multinational partners requires close coordination and maintenance support. U.S.
forces also provide technical assistance to share information and intelligence. 6-42. Early, concurrent planning is critical to the success of joint and multinational operations. Multinational ISR planning activities include, but are not limited to— Chapter 6 6-8 FM 3-55 3 May 2013  Developing requirements—information regarding the threat and the environment that needs to be collected and processed to meet the intelligence requirements of the commander.  Developing indicators—activity or lack of activity that confirms or denies the action or event specified in an intelligence requirement. Intelligence analysts develop indicators.  Developing the ISR plan—coordination between the collection manager and operations directorate. 6-43. U.S. personnel assigned to a multinational organization should know, and remain sensitive to, cultural and religious differences among its members. In some instances, these differences may result in periods of increased vulnerability for the joint force or require scheduling changes for meetings or briefings. 6-44. In most multinational operations, U.S. forces share intelligence with foreign military forces and receive intelligence from those forces. Intelligence policy and criteria are tailored to each multinational operation. In some multinational operations or campaigns, existing international standardization agreements may provide a basis for establishing rules and policies for conducting joint intelligence operations. Since each multinational operation is distinct, such agreements may have to be modified or amended based on the situation. Policy and procedures are tailored based on theater guidance and national policy as contained in DODD 5230.11. Staffs never disclose classified information automatically. Any disclosure must be consistent with U.S. national policy and U.S. military objectives, be done with security assurances in place, present a clearly defined U.S. advantage, and be limited to only necessary information. 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 A-1 Appendix A The Information Collection Annex to the Operation Order This appendix provides a format for Annex L (Information Collection) in Army plans and orders. The format for the annex can be modified to meet the requirements of the base order and operations. This chapter also includes a sample information collection plan. See ATTP 5-0.1 for additional guidance on formatting and procedures. ANNEX L (INFORMATION COLLECTION) A-1. The information collection annex clearly describes how information collection activities support the offensive, defensive, and stability or defense support of civil authorities operations throughout the conduct of the operations described in the base order. See Figure A-1 on pages A-2 through A-6. It synchronizes activities in time, space, and purpose to achieve objectives and accomplish the commander’s intent for reconnaissance, surveillance, and intelligence operations (including military intelligence disciplines). Appendix A A-2 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 [CLASSIFICATION] Place the classification at the top and bottom of every page of the Information Collection Annex. Place the classification marking (TS), (S), I, or (U) at the front of each paragraph and subparagraph in parentheses. Refer to AR 380-5 for classification and release marking instructions. Copy ## of ## copies Issuing headquarters Place of issue Date-time group of signature Message reference number Include the full heading if attachment is distributed separately from the base order or higher-level attachment. ANNEX L (Information Collection) TO OPERATION ORDER # [number] [(code name)]— [issuing headquarters] [(classification of title)] (U) References: List documents essential to understanding Annex L.
a. List maps and charts first. Map entries include series number, country, sheet names, or numbers, edition, and scale. b. List other references in subparagraphs labeled as shown. c.
A doctrinal reference for this annex includes FM 2-0. (U) Time Zone Used Throughout the Plan/Order: Write the time zone established in the base plan or order. 1. (U) Situation. a. (U) Area of Interest. No change to Annex B (Intelligence) or Appendix 1 (Army Design Methodology Products) to Annex C (Operations). b. (U) Area of Operations. No change to Appendix 2 (Operation Overlay) to Annex C (Operations). (1) (U) Terrain. Describe the aspects of terrain that impact operations. Refer to Annex B (Intelligence) as required. (2) (U) Weather. Describe the aspects of weather that impact operations. Refer to Annex B (Intelligence) as required. c. (U) Enemy Forces. No change to Annex B (Intelligence). d. (U) Friendly Forces. No change to base order, Annex A (Task Organization) and Annex C (Operations). e. (U) Interagency, Intergovernmental, and Nongovernmental Organizations. Identify and describe other organizations in the area of operations that may affect the conduct of operations or implementation of information collection-specific equipment and tactics. Refer to Annex V (Interagency Coordination) as required. f. (U) Civil Considerations. Describe the critical aspects of the civil situation that impact information collection activities. Refer to Appendix 1 (Intelligence Estimate) to Annex B (Intelligence) and Annex K (Civil Affairs Operations) as required. [page number] [CLASSIFICATION] Figure A-1. Example Annex L (Information Collection) annotated format The Information Collection Annex to the Operation Order 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 A-3 [CLASSIFICATION] ANNEX L (INFORMATION COLLECTION) TO OPERATION ORDER # [number] [(code name)]—[issuing headquarters] [(classification of title)] g. (U) Attachments and Detachments. If pertinent, list units or assets attached to or detached from the issuing headquarters. State when each attachment or detachment is effective (for example, on order, on commitment of the reserve) if different from the effective time of the base order. Do not repeat information already listed in Annex A (Task Organization). h. (U) Assumptions. List any information collection-specific assumptions that support the annex development. 2. (U) Mission. State the mission of information collection to support the operation—a short description of the who, what (task), when, where, and why (purpose) that clearly indicates the action to be taken and the reason for doing so. 3. (U) Execution. a. (U) Concept of Operations. This is a statement of the overall information collection objective. Describe how the tasks or missions of reconnaissance, surveillance, security, intelligence operations, and so forth support the commander’s intent and the maneuver plan. Direct the manner in which each element of the force cooperates to accomplish the key information collection tasks and ties that to support of the operation with task and purpose statement. Must describe, at minimum, the overall scheme of maneuver and concept of fires. It should refer to Appendix 1 (Information Collection Plan) to Annex L (Information Collection). The following subparagraphs are examples. Omit what is unnecessary for brevity. (1) (U) Movement and Maneuver.Provide the scheme of movement and maneuver for collection assets and any other unit given a key information collection task, according to the concept of operations in the base order (paragraph 3b) and Annex C (Operations). Describe the employment of information collection assets in relation to the rest of the force and state the method forces will enter the area of operations (AO). (2) (U) Intelligence. Describe the intelligence concept for supporting information collection. Refer to Annex B (Intelligence) as required. (3) (U) Fires. Describe the concept of fires to support information collection. Identify which information collection assets have priority of fires and the coordinating purpose of, priorities for, allocation of, and restrictions on fire support and fire support coordination measures. Refer to Annex D (Fires) as required. (4) (U) Protection. Describe protection support to information collection. Refer to Annex E (Protection) as required. (5) (U) Engineer. Describe engineer support, if applicable, to information collection. Identify priority of mobility and survivability assets. Refer to Annex G (Engineer) as required. (6) (U) Sustainment. Describe sustainment support to information collection as required. Refer to Annex F (Sustainment). (7) (U) Signal. Describe signal support to information collection as required. Refer to Annex H (Signal). (8) (U) Inform and influence. State overall concept for synchronizing information collection with inform and influence operations. Refer to Annex J (Inform and Influence Activities). [page number] [CLASSIFICATION] Figure A-1. Example Annex L (Information Collection) annotated format (continued) Appendix A A-4 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 [CLASSIFICATION] ANNEX L (INFORMATION COLLECTION) TO OPERATION ORDER # [number] [(code name)]—[issuing headquarters] [(classification of title)] (9) (U) Assessment. If required, describe the priorities for assessment for the information collection plan and identify the measures of effectiveness used to assess end state conditions and objectives. Refer to Annex M (Assessment) as required. b. (U) Tasks to Subordinate Units. State the information collection task assigned to each unit not identified in the base order. (Refer to Appendix 1 [Information Collection Plan] to Annex L [Information Collection] as needed.) (1) (U) Information Collection Support Tasks for Maneuver Units. (a) (U) Tasks to Maneuver Unit 1. (b) (U) Tasks to Maneuver Unit 2. (c) (U) Tasks to Maneuver Unit 3. (2) (U) Information Collection Support Tasks for Support Units. Direct units to observe and report according to Appendix 1 (Information Collection Plan) to Annex L (Information Collection). Consider all options such as Naval gunfire support. (a) (U) Military Intelligence. Refer to Annex B (Intelligence). (b) (U) Engineer. Refer to Annex G (Engineer). (c) (U) Fires. Refer to Annex D (Fires). (d) (U) Signal. Refer to Annex H (Signal). (e) (U) Sustainment. Refer to Annex F (Sustainment). (f) (U) Protection. Refer to Annex E (Protection). (g) (U) Public Affairs. Refer to Appendix 1 (Public Affairs) to Annex J (Inform and Influence Activities). (h) (U) Civil Affairs. Refer to Annex K (Civil Affairs Operations). c. (U) Coordinating Instructions. List only instructions applicable or not covered in unit standard operating procedures (SOPs). (1) (U) Time or Condition When the Plan Becomes Effective. (2) (U) Priority Intelligence Requirements. List priority intelligence requirements (PIRs) here, the information collection tasks associated with them, and the latest time information is of value. (3) (U) Essential Elements of Friendly Information. List essential elements of friendly information (EEFI) here. (4) (U) Fire Support Coordination Measures. List fire support coordination or control measures. Establish no fire areas for each PIR. (5) (U) Intelligence Handover Lines with Adjacent Units. Identify handover guidance and parameters; refer to necessary graphics or attachments as required. [page number] [CLASSIFICATION] Figure A-1. Example Annex L (Information Collection) annotated format (continued) The Information Collection Annex to the Operation Order 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 A-5 [CLASSIFICATION] ANNEX L (INFORMATION COLLECTION) TO OPERATION ORDER # [number] [(code name)]—[issuing headquarters] [(classification of title)] (6) (U) Limits of Advance, Limits of Reconnaissance, and Quick Reaction Force Response Instructions. Identify as required, referencing graphical depictions in attachments or instructions as needed. (7) (U) Airspace Coordinating Measures. List airspace control measures. (8) (U) Intelligence Coordination Measures. List information such as restrictions on international borders or other limitations and the coordination or special instructions that apply. Identify what unit is responsible for coordinating information collection activities in relation to the AO. (9) (U) Rules of Engagement. Refer to Appendix 11 (Rules of Engagement) to Annex C (Operations) as required. (10) (U) Risk Reduction Control Measures. State any reconnaissance, surveillance, and security-specific guidance such as fratricide prevention measures not included in SOPs, referring to Annex E (Protection) as required. (11) (U) Environmental Considerations. Refer to Appendix 5 (Environmental Considerations) to Annex G (Engineer) as required. (12) (U) Other Coordinating Instructions. List only instructions applicable to two or more subordinate units not covered in the base plan or order. 4. (U) Sustainment. Describe any sustainment requirements, subparagraphs may include: a. (U) Logistics. Refer to Appendix 1 (Logistics) to Annex F (Sustainment) as required. b. (U) Personnel. Refer to Appendix 2 (Personnel Services Support) to Annex F (Sustainment) as required. c. (U) Health Service Support. Refer to Appendix 3 (Health Service Support) to Annex F (Sustainment) as required. This includes medical evacuation. 5. (U) Command and Signal. a. (U) Command. (1) (U) Location of the Commander and Key Leaders. List the location of the commander and key intelligence collection leaders and staff officers. (2) (U) Succession of Command. State the succession of command if not covered in the unit’s standard operating procedures. (3) (U) Liaison Requirements. State intelligence collection liaison requirements not covered in the unit’s standard operating procedures. b. (U) Control. [page number] [CLASSIFICATION] Figure A-1. Example Annex L (Information Collection) annotated format (continued) Appendix A A-6 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 [CLASSIFICATION] ANNEX L (INFORMATION COLLECTION) TO OPERATION ORDER # [number] [(code name)]—[issuing headquarters] [(classification of title)] (1) (U) Command Posts. Describe the employment of command posts (CPs), including the location of each CP and its time of opening and closing, as appropriate. State the primary controlling CP for tasks or phases of the operation. (2) (U) Reports. List reports not covered in SOPs. Describe information collection reporting requirements for subordinate units. Refer to Annex R (Reports) as required. c. (U) Signal. List signal operating instructions for intelligence collection as needed. Consider operations security requirements. Address any intelligence collection specific communications and digitization connectivity requirements. Refer to Annex H (Signal) as required. ACKNOWLEDGE: Include only if attachment is distributed separately from the base plan or order. [Commander’s last name] [Commander’s rank] The commander or authorized representative signs the original copy. If the representative signs the original, add the phrase “For the Commander.” The signed copy is the historical copy and remains in the headquarters’ files. OFFICIAL: [Authenticator’s name] [Authenticator’s position] Use only if the commander does not sign the original attachment. If the commander signs the original, no further authentication is required. If the commander does not sign the signature of the preparing staff officer requires authentication and only the last name and rank of the commander appear in the signature block. ATTACHMENTS: List lower-level attachments (appendixes, tabs, and exhibits). Appendix 1 – Information Collection Plan Appendix 2 – Information Collection Overlay DISTRIBUTION: (if distributed separately from the base order). [page number] [CLASSIFICATION] Figure A-1. Example Annex L (Information Collection) annotated format (continued) THE INFORMATION COLLECTION PLAN A-2. Table A-1 is an example of an information collection plan. This plan can also be accompanied by a graphical depiction of the plan called the information collection overlay. Units may develop and adjust the format of their information collection plan to meet the requirements of the mission and clearly depict information collection in terms of time and space for execution. The information collection plan must contain—  Information about the area of operations (AO) for the collection assets.  Reporting guidance.  Identified named area of interest (NAI) or target area of interest (TAI).  The task for each asset. The Information Collection Annex to the Operation Order 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 A-7  The time the asset is to collect or that information is relevant.  References to any passage of lines or fire support and airspace control measures that are not standard operating procedures. Table A-1. Sample information collection plan Unit:                           Information Collection Plan                                          Period Covered From:                    To: PIR /IR Indicators (analysis of intelligence requirements) Avenue of approach coordinated From______ To_________ Assets to be employed Hour and destination of reports Remarks AN/PPS-5D 1st BN scouts 2d BN scouts 3rd BN scouts Prophet Shadow CI 1. 2. NAI Time Specific information or requests As per SOP As per SOP As per SOP NET NLT 1. 2. 3. AN Army/Navy IR intelligence requirement NET no earlier than SOP standard operating procedures BN battalion NAI named area of interest PIR priority intelligence requirement CI counterintelligence NLT no later than PPS precise positioning service This page intentionally left blank. 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 Glossary-1 Glossary Terms for which FM 3-55 is the proponent (authority) manual are marked with an asterisk (*). The proponent manual for other terms is listed in parentheses after the definition. SECTION I – ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS AO area of operations BCT brigade combat team BFSB battlefield surveillance brigade CBRN chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear CCIR commander’s critical information requirement COA course of action COP common operational picture CP command post DA Department of the Army DCGS-A Distributed Common Ground System (Army) EEFI essential elements of friendly information G-2 assistant chief of staff, intelligence G-2X assistant chief of staff, counterintelligence and human intelligence G-3 assistant chief of staff, operations G-7 assistant chief of staff, information operations G-9 assistant chief of staff, civil affairs operations IPB intelligence preparation of the battlefield ISR intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance J-2 intelligence directorate of a joint staff JTF joint task force LTIOV latest time information is of value MDMP military decisionmaking process NAI named area of interest NIST national intelligence support team NSRP national signals intelligence requirements process PIR priority intelligence requirement PRISM Planning Tool for Resource, Integration, Synchronization, and Management S-2 intelligence staff officer S-2X intelligence staff executive officer S-3 operations staff officer S-7 information operations staff officer S-9 civil affairs operations staff officer SOP standard operating procedure TAI target area of interest Glossary Glossary-2 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 SECTION II – TERMS assessment Determination of the progress toward accomplishing a task, creating a condition, or achieving an objective. (JP 3-0) *information collection An activity that synchronizes and integrates the planning and employment of sensors and assets as well as the processing, exploitation, and dissemination systems in direct support of current and future operations. intelligence The product resulting from the collection, processing, integration, evaluation, analysis, and interpretation of available information concerning foreign nations, hostile or potentially hostile forces or elements, or areas of actual or potential operations. The term is also applied to the activity which results in the product and to the organizations engaged in such activity. (JP 2-0) intelligence operations The tasks undertaken by military intelligence units and Soldiers to obtain information to satisfy validated requirements. (ADRP 2-0) intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance An activity that synchronizes and integrates the planning and operation of sensors, assets, and processing, exploitation, and dissemination systems in direct support of current and future operations. This is an integrated intelligence and operations function. (JP 2-01) multinational operations A collective term to describe military actions conducted by forces of two or more nations, usually undertaken within the structure of a coalition or alliance. (JP 3-16) reconnaissance A mission undertaken to obtain, by visual observation or other detection methods, information about the activities and resources of an enemy or adversary, or to secure data concerning the meteorological, hydrographic or geographic characteristics of a particular area. (JP 2-0) reconnaissance objective A terrain feature, geographic area, enemy force, adversary, or other mission or operational variable, such as specific civil considerations, about which the commander wants to obtain additional information. (ADRP 3-90) running estimate The continuous assessment of the current situation used to determine if the current operation is proceeding according to the commander’s intent and if planned future operations are supportable. (ADP 5-0) site exploitation Systematically searching for and collecting information, material, and persons from a designated location and analyzing them to answer information requirements, facilitate subsequent operations, or support criminal prosecution. (ATTP 3-90.15) security operations Those operations undertaken by a commander to provide the early and accurate warning of enemy operations, to provide the force being protected with time and maneuver space within which to react to the enemy, and to develop the situation to allow the commander to effectively use the protected force. (ADRP 3-90) special reconnaissance Reconnaissance and surveillance actions conducted as a special operation in hostile, denied, or politically sensitive environments to collect or verify information of strategic or operational significance, employing military capabilities not normally found in conventional forces. (JP 3-05) Glossary 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 Glossary-3 surveillance The systematic observation of aerospace, surface, or subsurface areas, places, persons, or things, by visual, aural, electronic, photographic, or other means. (JP 3-0) synchronization The arrangement of military actions in time, space, and purpose to produce maximum relative combat power at a decisive place and time. (JP 2-0) tempo The relative speed and rhythm of military operations over time with respect to the enemy. (ADRP 3-0) unified action The synchronization, coordination, and/or integration of the activities of governmental and nongovernmental entities with military operations to achieve unity of effort. (JP 1) This page intentionally left blank. 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 References-1 References REQUIRED PUBLICATIONS These documents must be available to intended users of this publication. ADRP 1-02. Operational Terms and Military Symbols. 31 August 2012. JP 1-02. Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms. 8 November 2010. RELATED PUBLICATIONS These documents contain relevant supplemental information.JOINT PUBLICATIONS Most joint publications are available online: <http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jointpub.htm.> DODD 5230.11, Disclosure of Classified Military Information to Foreign Governments and International Organizations, 16 June 1992.
http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/pdf/customer/STINFOdata/DoDD_523011.pdf JP 1. Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the United States. 20 March 2009. JP 2-0. Joint Intelligence. 22 June 2007. JP 2-01. Joint and National Intelligence Support to Military Operations. 5 January 2012. JP 3-0. Joint Operations. 11 August 2011. JP 3-05. Special Operations. 18 April 2011. JP 3-16. Multinational Operations. 7 March 2007. JP 3-33. Joint Task Force Headquarters. 30 July 2012. ARMY PUBLICATIONS Most Army doctrinal publications are available online: <http://www.apd.army.mil/>. ADP 5-0. The Operations Process. 17 May 2012. ADRP 2-0. Intelligence. 31 August 2012. ADRP 3-0. Unified Land Operations. 16 May 2012. ADRP 3-90. Offense and Defense. 31 August 2012. ADRP 5-0. The Operations Process. 17 May 2012. AR 380-5. Department of the Army Information Security Program. 29 September 2000. ATTP 2-01. Planning Requirements and Assessing Collection. 23 April 2012. ATTP 3-09.13. The Battlefield Coordination Detachment. 21 July 2010. ATTP 3-90.15. Site Exploitation Operations. 8 July 2010. ATTP 5-0.1. Commander and Staff Officer Guide. 14 September 2011. FM 2-0. Intelligence. 23 March 2010. FM 2-01.3. Intelligence Preparation of the Battlefield/Battlespace. 15 October 2009. FM 2-22.3. Human Intelligence Collector Operations. 6 September 2006. FM 3-20.96. Reconnaissance and Cavalry Squadron. 12 March 2010. FM 3-55.1. Battlefield Surveillance Brigade. 14 June 2010. FM 3-90.6. Brigade Combat Team. 14 September 2010. TC 2-22.303. The 2X Handbook. 31 July 2006. PRESCRIBED FORMS None References References-2 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 REFERENCED FORMS DA Form 2028. Recommended Changes to Publications and Blank Forms. 3 May 2013 FM 3-55 Index-1 Index Entries are by paragraph number. A action, knowledge and, 1-1 air and space operations center, 6-13–6-14, 6-33, 6-35–6-37 air support, 6-10 annex, information collection, A-1 area surveillance, 1-72, 1-74 assess, 2-8 information collection, 3-57– 3-60 assessment, 3-57, 3-60 information collection planning, 2-7 assets, availability of, 3-32 capabilities of, 3-21–3-31 collection requirements, 4-26 information collection, 5-1– 5-41 multinational operations, 6-44 reconnaissance, 1-39, 1-41 retask, 4-29 review, 3-20–3-33 tasking, 4-5 assumptions, identify, 3-35–3-36 B battle rhythm, 2-29 operations and intelligence working group, 2-31 battlefield coordination detachment, air and space operations center, 6-36 battlefield surveillance brigade, 5-26–5-28 augmentation, 5-28 board, 2-28 brigade combat team, 5-35–5-40 intelligence, 5-38 operations, 5-37 reconnaissance squadron, 5-39 C capabilities, assets, 3-21–3-33 CCIR, 3-50 COA development, 3-51–3-54 information collection activities, 5-3 information collection planning, 3-39–3-40 COA, information collection plan, 3-42 reconnaissance, 1-31–1-34 COA analysis, war game, 3-55 COA development, 3-51–3-54 CCIR, 3-54 collection considerations, 3-51 integrated plan, 3-52 collect, information and data, 1-26 collection assets, 4-20 collection requirements, assets, 4-26 combat aviation brigade, 5-29– 5-31 combined air and space operations center, 6-35–6-37 commander’s guidance, central role, 2-12 collection activities, 2-16 collection planning, 2-15 initial commander’s intent, 2-18 planning, 2-17–2-18 commander’s critical information requirements. See CCIR. commanders, assess, 2-8 EEFI, 2-5 guidance by, 2-4, 2-12–2-19 information collection, 2-3 initial guidance, 2-14–2-16 needs, 2-9–2-11 role, 2-1–2-8 staff efforts, 2-6 understanding, 2-1, 2-10–2-11 concept of operations, joint ISR, 6-15 constraints, determine, 3-34 counterintelligence, 1-82 course of action. See COA. D deployment, information collection assets, 5-10 durability, 3-27 E EEFI, 2-5 information collection planning, 3-39–3-40 engagement criteria, 1-59 entry, information collection assets, 5-11–5-14 reconnaissance, 5-12 vulnerability, 5-11 essential elements of friendly information. See EEFI. execute, information collection, 1-8–1-9 F facts, identify, 3-35–3-36 feedback, provide, 4-18–4-21 requirements, 4-20, 4-26–4-28 fires brigade, 5-32–5-34 task-organized, 5-34 focus, reconnaissance, 1-53–1-55 fusion working group, refine and fuse intelligence, 2-38 G geolocation, accuracy, 3-26 guidance, commander, 2-12–2-18 technical channels, 1-10–1-13 H higher headquarters order, mission analysis, 3-14 I information, 1-1 collectors, 5-13 correlate, 4-13–4-15 reconnaissance, 1-33, 1-41 sharing, 5-42 transition, 5-15 information collection, activities, 1-18–1-21, 3-1, 3-3, 3-8, 4-25, 5-4 annex, A-1 assess, 1-6 capabilities, 5-1, 5-41 CCIR, 1-13, 3-5, 5-3 COA selection, 3-4 collect and report, 1-14–1-16 definition, 1-4 directing, 4-1 effective, 1-27 elements, 1-5 execute, 1-8–1-9 foundations, 1-1–1-83 integration of, 1-20 network-enabled, 5-42 outputs, 3-12 personnel recovery support, 3-6 purpose, 1-22–1-29 scheme of support, 4-8–4-30 staffs, 1-15 Index Entries are by paragraph number. Index-2 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 information collection (continued) tasks, 1-30–1-83, 3-58 tasking, 4-1 technical channels, 1-10–1-13 information collection assets, 5-1– 5-42 by echelon, 5-18–5-41 by level, 5-3–5-8 by phase, 5-9–5-17 deployment, 5-10 entry, 5-11–5-14 transition, 5-15–5-17 information collection overlay, 4-6–4-7 information collection plan, 3-41– 3-44, 4-2–4-5, collection requirements, 4-2 format, 4-3 information collection overlay, 4-6–4-7 sample information collection matrix, 4-4 tasking, 4-5 tools, 3-43 update, 4-22–4-24 information collection planning, 1-24–1-26, 2-3, 3-4–3-5 assessment, 2-7 CCIR, 3-39–3-40 considerations, 3-1–3-5 EEFI, 3-39–3-40 IPB, 2-6, 3-7 MDMP, 3-7–3-56 operations and intelligence working group, 2-30–2-37 initial guidance, 2-14–2-16 integration, joint ISR and, 6-4 intelligence defined, 1-20 disciplines, 1-82–1-83 multinational operations, 6-40 production of, 3-49 reconnaissance and surveillance, 1-2 staff, 3-18 intelligence estimate, tools, 3-11 intelligence operations, 1-82 technical channels, 1-12–1-13 intelligence preparation of the battlefield, See IPB. intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance. See ISR. interdependence, joint ISR and, 6-5 intergovernmental organizations, 6-38 IPB, 3-15–3-18 information collection planning, 2-6, 3-7 products, 3-15–3-17 reconnaissance, 1-31 J joint air planning, products, 6-35 joint air planning process, joint ISR plan, 6-13–6-14 liaison, 6-14 joint intelligence, organizations, 6-33 joint intelligence operations center, 6-32 joint intelligence support element, 6-34 joint ISR, 6-1–6-44 concept of operations, 6-15 concepts of, 6-3–6-5 considerations, 6-29–6-30 doctrine, 6-6–6-7 organization, 6-31–6-44 planning systems, 6-12–6-15 resources, 6-8–6-11 joint task force, 6-31–6-32 K–L knowledge, action and, 1-1 laws, technical channels, 1-11 liaison, air and space operations center, 6-37 light, effects of, 3-23 M MDMP, 3-7–3-56 information collection planning, 3-7–3-56 military decisionmaking process. See MDMP. military intelligence brigade, 5-22– 5-25 support from, 5-22 theater army and, 5-24 mission, receipt of, 3-9–3-12 mission analysis, 3-13–3-50 higher headquarters order, 3-14 initial collection requirements, 3-18 initial guidance, 3-13 IPB, 3-15 tasks, 3-19 mission intelligence, briefing and debriefing, 1-17 multinational operations, 6-39– 6-44 contributions, 6-41 defined, 6-39 intelligence, 6-40 planning activities, 6-42 standardization agreements, 6-44 N national intelligence support teams, 6-17–6-18 national ISR, guidelines, 6-16 planning, 6-19 requests for information systems, 6-19 resources, 6-16 national signals intelligence requirements process. See NSRP. network surveillance, 1-76 nongovernmental organizations, 6-38 NSRP, 6-23–6-27 information needs, 6-26 prioritized, 6-27 tracking, 6-24 O objectives, reconnaissance, 1-35– 1-36, 1-40 operational area, participants, 6-2 operational environment, describing, 3-10 operations, monitor, 4-12 shaping, 1-18 operations and intelligence working group, battle rhythm, 2-31, 2-34 information collection planning, 2-30 output, 2-33 representatives, 2-32 responsibilities of, 2-30 orders, production, 3-56 P performance, history, 3-31 personnel recovery support, 3-6 phases, information collection assets, 5-9–5-17 Index Entries are by paragraph number.3 May 2013 FM 3-55 Index-3 plan, information collection, 1-12,1-20, A-2 tactical, 5-7–5-8 planning, 2-12 assumptions, 3-35–3-36 considerations, 3-4–3-5 information collection, 2-3 national ISR, 6-19 planning systems, joint ISR, 6-12 point surveillance, 1-75 production, requirements of, 3– 48-3–50 products, IPB, 3–16 pull, reconnaissance, 1–54 push, reconnaissance, 1–55 R range, capability, 3-21–3-22 receipt of mission, 3-9–3-12 reconnaissance, 1-31–1-59 accurate and timely information, 1-41 assets, 1-39 continuous, 1-38 course of action, 1-33 criteria, 1-52, 1-59 defined, 1-31 deployment of, 5-14 develop, 1-44 effort, 1-40 enemy contact, 1-43 forceful and stealthy, 1-58 forms, 1-45–1-51 freedom of maneuver, 1-42 fundamentals, 1-37–1-44 instructions, 1-36 IPB, 1-33 methods, 1-32 objective, 1-35 tempo, 1-56–1-58 reconnaissance and surveillance, intelligence and, 1-2 reconnaissance in force, 1-49 reports, correlate to requirements, 4-13–4-15 screen, 4-16–4-17 requests for collection or support, 3-45–3-47 requests for information, 3-45– 3-47 national ISR, 6-19 requirements, correlate to reports, 4-13–4-15 develop, 4-28 requirements management system, 6-20–6-22 resources, characteristics, 3-24 guidelines, 6-28 joint ISR, 6-8–6-11 retask assets, 4-29 risk assessment, 3-37–3-38 route, 1-46 running estimate, 3-59 defined, 1-3 S scheme of support, information collection, 4-8–4-30 screen reports, 4-16–4-17 security operations, 1-77–1-81 fundamentals, 1-80 protect the force, 1-78 shaping operations, 1-77 tasks, 1-79 shaping operations, security operations, 1-77 signals intelligence, 1-82 site exploitation, defined, 4-10 support to, 4-10–4-11 special operations forces, capabilities, 5-20 conventional forces and, 5-21 staff efforts, 2–6 feedback, 4–18 functions, 3–3 input, 1-27–1-29 intelligence, 3-18 responsibilities, 2–34–2–35 role, 2-20–2-26 running estimate, 2-25 support from, 2-26 strategic, information collection assets, 5-5 surveillance, 1-60–1-76 area, 1-74 characteristics, 1-67–1-71 continuous, 1-68 defined, 1-60 early warning, 1-69 key targets, 1-70 network, 1-76 observation, 1-61 overlapping coverage, 1-71 performing, 1-62 point, 1-75 tasks, 1-62 types, 1-72–1-76 watch, 1-65 zone, 1-73 sustainability, 3-29 synchronization, defined, 3-2 T tactical, information collection assets, 5-7–5-8 targeting working group, 2-39– 2-41 information collection support, 2-40 results, 2-41 tasks, information collection, 1-30–1-83, 3-19 reconnaissance, 1-31–1-34 technical channels, 1-10 technical channels, applicable laws and policies, 1-11 establish, 1-10–1-13 subtasks, 1-9–1-17 supervision of intelligence assets, 1-13 technical characteristics, resources, 3-24 technical intelligence, 1-82 tempo, defined, 1-56 reconnaissance, 1-56–1-58 threat activity, 3-28 threat event template, 3-17 timeliness, reporting, 3-25 tools, information collection plan, 3-43 intelligence estimate, 3-11 transition, 4-30 information collection assets, 5-15–5-17 U–V understanding, commander, 2-1, 2-10 factors of, 2-2 unified action, 6-1–6-2 defined, 6-1 vulnerability, 3-30 W war game, COA analysis, 3-55 working group, description, 2-27 fusion, 2-38 input from, 2-27–2-41 operations and intelligence working group, 2-30–2-37 targeting, 2-39–2-41 Index Entries are by paragraph number. Index-4 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 Z zone, 1-47 zone surveillance, 1-72 FM 3-55 3 May 2013 By order of the Secretary of the Army: RAYMOND T. ODIERNO General, United States Army Chief of Staff Official: JOYCE E. MORROW Administrative Assistant to the Secretary of the Army 1311403 DISTRIBUTION: Active Army, Army National Guard/Army National Guard of the United States, and United States Army Reserve: To be distributed according to the initial distribution number (IDN) 116035, requirements for FM 3-55.